  
J. Math. Fund. Sci., Vol. 45, No. 1, 2013, 17-28                           17 
 
Received February 29th, 2012,1stRevision August 29th, 2012,2ndRevision October15th, 2012, Accepted for 
publication November 28th, 2012. 
Copyright ? 2013 Published by ITB Journal Publisher, ISSN: 2337-5760, DOI: 10.5614/j.math.fund.sci.2013.45.1.2 
Seismic Velocity Structures beneath the Guntur Volcano 
Complex, West Java, Derived from Simultaneous 
Tomographic Inversion and Hypocenter Relocation 
Andri Dian Nugraha
1
, Sri Widiyantoro
1
, Awan Gunawan
2 
& Gede Suantika
3
 
1
Global Geophysical Group, Faculty of Mining and Petroleum Engineering,  
Institut Teknologi Bandung, Jalan Ganesa No. 10, Bandung 40132, Indonesia 
2
 Graduate Program of Earth Science, Faculty of Earth Science and Technology,  
Institut Teknologi Bandung, Jalan Ganesa No. 10, Bandung 40132, Indonesia 
3
Center for Volcanology and Geological Hazard Mitigation (CVGHM),                   
Jalan Diponegoro No. 57, Bandung 40122, Indonesia 
Email: nugraha@gf.itb.ac.id 
 
 
Abstract. We conducted travel time tomographic inversion to image seismic 
velocity structures (Vp, Vs, and Vp/Vs ratio) with simultaneous hypocenter 
adjustment beneath the Guntur volcano complex that is located in the Garut 
district, West Java province, Indonesia. The Guntur volcano is one of the active 
volcanoes in Indonesia, although large eruptions have not occurred for about 160 
years. We used volcanic and tectonic earthquakes catalog data from seismic 
stations deployed by Centre for Volcanology and Geological Hazard Mitigation 
(CVGHM). For the tomographic inversion procedure, we set grid nodes with a 
horizontal spacing of 2 x 2 km
2
 and an average vertical spacing of 2 km. Our 
results show low Vp, low Vs, and high Vp/Vs ratio regions beneath the Guntur 
crater and the Gandapura caldera at depths of 6-8 km and 7-9 km, respectively. 
These features can be associated with amelt-filled pore rock structure. However, 
a low Vp/Vs ratio and low velocities are exhibited beneath the Kamojang caldera 
at depths of 2-6 km that may be associated with rock with H2O-filled pores with 
a high aspect ratio. 
Keywords: Seismic tomography; Guntur volcano; Seismic structure; Melt-filled pore; 
West Java. 
1 Introduction 
Indonesia is located in a very active tectonic region that is influenced by four 
major tectonic plates, i.e. the Eurasian, Indo-Australian, Caroline (Western 
Pacific) and Philippine Sea plates. As a result, Indonesia has 128 active 
volcanoes and high seismicity activity along the subduction zones within the 
Indonesian archipelago (Figure 1). In this tomographic study, we chose the 
Guntur volcano complex that is located in Garut, West Java, to investigate 
physical properties beneath this active volcano. The complex of the Guntur 
volcano includes the summit, crater, and caldera [1]. The Guntur volcano 
18 Andri Dian Nugraha, et al. 
complex has two calderas, i.e. (i) the older Kamojang caldera in the western 
part, a geothermal area where a power plant is running, and (ii) the younger 
Gandapura caldera in the eastern part (Figure 2). The last large eruption of the 
Guntur volcano occurred in 1847, which produced a tholeiitic basaltic flow 
reaching the Cipanas village near Tarong, about 4 km southeast of the Guntur 
crater [2]. In order to prepare for volcano hazard mitigation, we conducted a 
tomographic inversion to enhance our understanding of the geological features 
and physical properties of the Guntur volcano complex. 
 
 
Figure 1 (A) Distribution of active volcanoes in Indonesia as indicated by the 
solid red triangles [3]. (B) The location of the Guntur volcano is in Garut, West-
Java province. 
Seismic Velocity Structures beneath Guntur Volcano Complex  19 
 
 
Figure 2 Topographic contour, relocated earthquake epicenters (red circles), 
and seismographic stations (black triangles). The red triangle depicts the location 
of the Guntur volcano. Thick, gray lines A-AÅf, B-BÅf, C-CÅf, D-DÅf, E-EÅf, and F-FÅf 
depict the locations of the vertical sections presented in Figures 5 and 7. 
2 Data and Methods 
In this study, we used P and S arrival time data of volcanic and tectonic 
earthquakes provided by the CVGHM, inverted for three-dimensional velocity 
structures (Vp, Vs, and Vp/Vs) beneath the Guntur volcano complex. We 
applied the SIMUPLS12 method [4-8] to determine the 3-D Vp and Vp/Vs 
structures and simultaneously the hypocenter relocation. Predicted arrival times 
through the 3-D structure were calculated for ray paths using the pseudo-
bending technique of Um and Thurber [9]. We used selected events provided by 
the CVGHM from 1995 to 2007. We did not use all earthquake events during 
that time period. Only those earthquake events were chosen that had a large 
number of picked arrival times (generally over 6 stations) and covered the 
region as well as possible. In total, 490 events with 4686 P and 2343 S arrival 
times from 20 stations were used in this study for the tomographic inversion 
(Figure 3). The spatial resolution and setting of grid nodes for the Vp and 
Vp/Vs inversion depended on the earthquake distribution, station distribution, 
20 Andri Dian Nugraha, et al. 
and ray coverage. We used a horizontal grid spacing of 2 x 2 km
2
 and a vertical 
spacing of 2 km, which provide a fairly high spatial resolution and are relatively 
stable for the inversion. 
 
Figure 3 (A) Map of station distribution (black triangles), epicenter before 
relocation distribution (green circles), relocated epicenter distribution (red 
circles), grid nodes (blue plus), and the location of the Guntur volcano (red 
triangle) in the study area. (B) Associated hypocenter plot along the latitude. (C) 
Same as (B), but along the longitude. 
During the tomographic inversion, we applied damping in order to stabilize the 
inversion processes. The purpose of damping is to a give a solution of the grid 
nodes without ray paths to bias relative to the initial velocity model, and to 
smoothen the model. The optimum damping values were selected from a trade-
off curve comparing data variance (misfit) with model variance, which showed 
a significant reduction in the data variance with a moderate increase in the 
solution variance (Figure 4). The optimal damping value varies with the amount 
and the distribution of the data, and the size and spacing of the grid model [8]. 
 
Seismic Velocity Structures beneath Guntur Volcano Complex  21 
 
 
Figure 4 Curves indicating data variance versus model variance to determine 
the optimal damping parameter. The selected damping parameters are 20 and 10 
for Vp and Vp/Vs, respectively, from one step inversion. 
We started the tomographic inversion with an initial 1-D velocity from our 
previous work about the Guntur volcano complex [10]. We used an initial 
Vp/Vs value of 1.80 [11]. The resolution of the tomographic model was 
evaluated using a checkerboard test, a diagonal resolution matrix, and a ray-hit 
count (Figures 5 and 6). The checkerboard test pattern was set with alternating 
fast and slow velocities at each grid point, with a contrast of 10% relative to the 
reference velocity model. A synthetic set of travel times was created for the 
checkerboard velocity pattern using the same ray paths as used in the real data 
inversion and then the synthetic data were inverted to explore how well the 
checkerboard pattern was recovered. The diagonal resolution element matrix 
22 Andri Dian Nugraha, et al. 
[12] ranges from 0.0 to 1.0, where 0.0 is unresolved and 1.0 is completely 
resolved. 
 
 
 
Figure 5 (A) Vertical sections across the initial checkerboard pattern and the 
recovered checkerboard pattern, diagonal resolution matrix, and ray hit count for 
P-wave data along AAÅf, BBÅf and CCÅf. (B) As in (A), but for DDÅf, EEÅf and FFÅf. 
Seismic Velocity Structures beneath Guntur Volcano Complex  23 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Horizontal sections of the initial checkerboard pattern and the 
recovered checkerboard pattern, diagonal resolution matrix, and ray hit count for 
Vp at depths of 4, 6, and 8 km. (B) As in (A), but for Vp/Vs. 
24 Andri Dian Nugraha, et al. 
3 Tomographic Inversion Results 
Figure 5 shows vertical cross sections (AAÅf, BBÅf, CCÅf, DDÅf, EEÅf, and FFÅf) of 
the 
 
 
Figure 7 (A) Profiles of the P-wave velocity perturbations (dVp), S-wave 
velocity perturbations (dVs), and Vp/Vs for AAÅf, BBÅf and CCÅf. (B) same as (A), 
but for DDÅf, EEÅf and FFÅf. 
Seismic Velocity Structures beneath Guntur Volcano Complex  25 
 
 
Figure 8 Horizontal map views of the P-wave velocity perturbations (dVp), left 
panel; S-wave velocity perturbations (dVs), middle panel; and Vp/Vs, right 
panel, at depths of 4, 6, and 8 km, respectively, from the Guntur summit. 
the recovered checkerboard test along with the diagonal resolution matrix, and 
the ray hit count. Figure 6 shows horizontal map views of the recovered 
checkerboard pattern, the diagonal resolution matrix, and the ray hit count at a 
depth of 0 km (which is associated with the mean sea level - MSL), 2 km, 4 km, 
6 km, and 8 km. There is a good resolution beneath the Guntur crater, the 
Gandpura caldera, and the eastern part of Kamojang at depths of 4 to 10 km. 
These areas are related to a high diagonal resolution matrix and high ray hit 
count values.  
The results of the tomographic inversion for the vertical and horizontal sections 
through the Guntur complex are shown in Figures 7 and 8, respectively. Vp and 
Vs tomograms are shown as percentage differences from the initial 1-D model 
26 Andri Dian Nugraha, et al. 
and Vp/Vs were plotted using the absolute values. The obtained relocated 
hypocenters became more focused beneath the Guntur crater and the Gandapura 
caldera as shown in Figure 3.  
For profiles beneath the Guntur crater (AAÅf and EEÅf) in Figure 7, low velocity 
and high Vp/Vs ratio anomalies were detected at depths of 6 to 8 km. Profiles 
beneath the Gandapura caldera (BBÅf and EEÅf) in Figure 7 show similar features 
of the low velocity and high Vp/Vs ratio values at depths of 7 to 9 km. Opposite 
features of anomalies of the low Vp/Vs values and low P- and S-velocities were 
observed beneath the Kamojang caldera at depths of 2 to 6 km (CCÅf in Figure 
7).  
For the horizontal map views shown in Figure 8, small areas of low velocity 
anomalies and high Vp/Vs ratio values were observed (107.86?and -7.14? 
coordinate) in the eastern part of the Guntur crater at a depth of 6 km, and these 
anomalies also appear at a depth of 8 km beneath the southern part of the 
Guntur volcano. In the northern part of the Kamojang caldera, low velocity 
anomalies and high Vp/Vs ratio values were observed at a depth of 8 km.  
4 Discussion 
The tomographic inversion results show low velocity anomalies and high Vp/Vs 
values beneath the Guntur summit and the Gandapura caldera at a depth of 6 to 
8 km, and 7 to 9 km, respectively. These features are very interesting for active 
volcanic areas. Previous studies concluded that the existence of melt-filled 
pores and/or H2O-filled pores apparently lowers seismic velocity and increases 
the PoissonÅfs ratio [13,14]. Hence, according to our interpretation of the low 
velocity and high Vp/Vs ratio anomalies beneath the Guntur summit and the 
Gandapura caldera, they may be associated with the melt-filled pores of the 
rock. The interpreted melt-filled pores of the rock beneath the Guntur summit 
may be related to a weak zone or a heat source and may trigger seismic activity 
beneath the active volcano. In the Kamojang region, a geothermal power plant 
has been operated for years. The anomaly beneath the Kamojang caldera 
exhibits low velocity and Vp/Vs values. In previous studies, these phenomena 
were related to the existence of H2O-filled pores with a large aspect ratio [e.g. 
11]. 
5 Concluding Remarks 
We have conducted simultaneous inversion for velocity structures and 
hypocenter adjustment. Our results show anomalies of low P-and S-velocity and 
a high Vp/Vs ratio beneath the Guntur summit and the Gandapura caldera that 
are interpreted to be related to melt-filled pores in the rock [cf. 13,14]. This 
Seismic Velocity Structures beneath Guntur Volcano Complex  27 
 
interpretation is in good agreement with a recent study on the seismic 
attenuation tomography of Mt. Guntur by Priyono, et al. [15]. They concluded 
that the high seismic attenuation beneath the Guntur volcano system may be 
interpreted as a hot volcanic material zone or rock with melt-filled pores. These 
geological features are of importance to have a detailed understanding of the 
physical characteristics for volcano hazard mitigation.  
Acknowledgments 
We gratefully acknowledge the CVGHM for providing the earthquake data 
catalog used in this study. Thanks also go to the reviewers for their constructive 
comments. This work was supported by a research grant (Riset Peningkatan 
Kapasitas) from ITB, 2010 and a research grant from the Graduate Research on 
Earthquake and Active Tectonics (GREAT), ITB, 2011. 
References 
[1] Matahelemual, J., Gunung Guntur, Berita Berkala Vulkanologi Edisi 
Khusus, Direktorat Vulkanologi Bandung (in Indonesian), 1989. 
[2] Kusumadinata, K., Data Dasar Gunungapi Indonesia, Direktorat 
Vulkanologi Bandung (in Indonesian), 1979. 
[3] Kusumadinata, K., Hadian, R., Hamidi, S. & Reksowirogo, L.G., 
Catalogue of References on Indonesian Volcanoes with Eruptions in 
Historical Time, Direktorat Vulkanologi, Direktorat Jenderal 
Pertambangan Umum, Departemen Pertambangan dan Energi, Republik 
Indonesia (in Indonesian), 1979. 
[4] Eberhart-Phillips, D., Local Earthquake Tomography Velocities and 
Vp/Vs Theory, in Seismic Tomography: Theory and Practice, pp. 563-
583, H.M. Iyer & K. Hirahara (Eds), CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla, 1993. 
[5] Evan, J.R., Eberhart-Phillips, D. & Thurber, C.H., UserÅfs Manual for 
SIMULPS12 for Imaging Vp and Vp/Vs: Derivative of The ÅgThurberÅh 
Tomographic Inversion  SIMUL3 for Local Earthquakes and Explosions, 
U.S. Geol. Surv. Open File Rep., pp. 94-431, 1994. 
[6] Thurber, C.H., Earthquake Locations and Three-Dimensional Crustal 
Structure in The Coyota Lake Area, Central California, J. Geophys. Res., 
88, pp. 8226-8236, 1983. 
[7] Thurber, C.H., Local Earthquake Tomography Velocities and Vp/Vs 
Theory, in Seismic Tomography: Theory and Practice, pp. 563-583, H.M. 
Iyer & K. Hirahara (Eds), CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla, 1993. 
[8] Nugraha, A.D. & Mori, J., Three-Dimensional Velocity Structure in The 
Bungo Channel and Shikoku Area, Japan, and Its Relationship to Low-
Frequency Earthquakes, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L24307. doi: 
10.1029/2006GL028479, 2006. 
28 Andri Dian Nugraha, et al. 
[9] Um, J. & Thurber, C.H., A Fast Algorithm for Two-Point Seismic Ray 
Tracing, Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am., 77, pp. 972-986, 1987. 
[10] Nugraha, A.D., Suantika, G. & Widiyantoro, S., Relocation of 
Earthquake Hypocenter at Mt. Guntur Area Using Three Dimensional 
Velocity Model, Jurnal Geofisika Indonesia, I, pp.1-6. (in Indonesian with 
abstract in English), 2006. 
[11] Priyono, A., Suantika, G., Widiyantoro, S., Priadi, B.& Surono, Three 
dimensional P-and S-wave Velocity Structures of Mt. Guntur, West-Java, 
Indonesia, from Seismic Tomography, International Journal of 
Tomography & Statistic, 16(W11), pp. 1-11, 2011. 
[12] Menke, W., Geophysical Data Analysis: Discrete Inverse Theory, Univ. 
Calif. San Diego, 1989. 
[13] Nakajima, J., Hasegawa, A., Horiuchi, S., Yoshimoto, K., Yoshida, T. & 
Umino, N., Crustal Heterogeneity Around The Nagamachi-Rifu Fault, 
Northeastern Japan, as Inferred from Travel-Time Tomography, Earth 
Planets Space, 58, pp. 843-853, 2006. 
[14] Takei, Y., Effect of Pore Geometry on Vp/Vs: from Equilibrium Geometry 
to Crack, J. Geophys. Res., 107(B2), 2043. doi:10.1029/2001JB000522, 
2002. 
[15] Priyono, A., Suantika, G., Widiyantoro, S. & Nugraha, A.D., Three-
Dimensional Seismic Attenuation Structure of Mt. Guntur, West Java, 
Indonesia, International Journal of Tomography and Statistics, 17(S11), 
pp. 17-28, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
