  
J. Math. Fund. Sci., Vol. 45, No. 1, 2013, 93-103                     93 
 
Received November 28th, 2012, Revised February 14th, 2013, Accepted for publication March 20th, 2013. 
Copyright ? 2013 Published by ITB Journal Publisher, ISSN: 2337-5760, DOI: 10.5614/j.math.fund.sci.2013.45.1.8 
Development of an Inversion Method                                   
for Low Velocity Medium 
Afnimar, Andri Dian Nugraha
 
& Ahmad Syahputra 
Faculty of Mining and Petroleum Engineering, Bandung Institute of Technology, 
Jalan Ganesa 10, Bandung 40132, Indonesia 
Email: afnimar.1987@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract. The main problem with the inversion of a low velocity medium is the 
application of an appropriate ray tracing method after choosing a suitable model 
parameterization. Block parameterization is not suitable, because it is not 
capable of representing the velocity model well. A large amount of blocks with a 
small grid size are needed to express the model well, but in that case, a ray 
coverage problem will be encountered. A knot-point parameterization model is 
better suited than a block model, because it can express the velocity model well, 
while the number of variables is much smaller. Ray calculation using the pseudo-
bending method is not appropriate for the velocity model because of an 
instability problem at high velocity gradients. The crucial problem of this 
method involves the initial ray-path that is optimized in order to obtain the ÅgtrueÅh 
ray, but does not satisfy the Fermat principle. These problems can be solved by 
applying the eikonal-solver method, because this can handle high-velocity 
gradients and does not need an initial ray path. Using a suitable model 
parameterization and appropriate ray tracing method, the inversion can obtain 
good results that fit the desired output. Applying a block model and the pseudo-
bending method will not produce the desired output. 
Keywords: Eikonal-solver method; Fermat principle; knot-point parameterization; low 
velocity structure; pseudo-bending method.  
1 Introduction 
Many current inversion techniques use seismic wave arrival time data to 
estimate subsurface structures [1-3]. This is preceded by an effective model 
parameterization and followed by the selection of an appropriate method of 
theoretical ray calculation acting as a forward modeling. After that, a system of 
equations in the form of a matrix can be formed and its inversion can be 
calculated by various methods. 
When model Parameterization is performed to describe a subsurface structure, 
the chosen number of parameters should not be too high, so as to get a kernel 
matrix that is not too large and doesnÅft contain too many zero-value matrix 
components. Until now, parameterizations usually are carried using a block 
model, but a large number of blocks are needed to describe the geological 
94 Afnimar, Andri Dian Nugraha & Ahmad Syhaputra 
structure well. Therefore, an alternative method to parameterize the model is 
needed. In this study, model parameterization will be conducted using a knot 
point model as well as a block model. So far, the knot point model has been 
applied by few seismologists [4]. Both methods of parameterization will be 
applied to the same subsurface structure, selected according to the criteria 
mentioned above. Miyazawa and Kato [5] noted that using the velocity and 
slowness at knot points will produce different tomography result, unless a 
carefully formulated tomographic problem is applied. We will apply slowness 
parameterization because in the way we will get the linear form of the kernel 
function.  
The next step is the selection of a ray tracing method suitable for the selected 
model parameterization. Application of the pseudo-bending method ([6]) is very 
popular because of its efficiency. However, this method has the disadvantage 
that it needs an initial value (initial trajectory). This will lead to inaccuracies in 
the calculation of the ÅgrealÅh trajectory as well as its traveltime, especially in low 
velocity zones. In addition, there is an instability problem in the ray calculation 
in case of high-velocity gradient structures. In this study, we have analyzed the 
problems of the pseudo-bending method and have found another ray tracing 
method, which does generate an accurate calculation. This method is called the 
eikonal-solver method ([7]), where an initial value (initial trajectory) is not 
required and the problems with high velocity gradients can be overcome. The 
selection criterion for choosing the appropriate method is that is has to satisfy 
the Fermat principle, according to which the rays should avoid low-velocity 
zones. 
The last step is the formulation of the inversion formula using a gradient 
inversion method. The inversion method that we have developed can be applied 
to a highly heterogeneous medium, especially in cases where volcanic seismic 
low-velocity anomalies exist in weak zones and zones of high fluid content. We 
have compared the method with the inversion method that is most commonly 
employed and that uses a block model and pseudo bending method. In this 
article, the superiority of our method will be demonstrated. 
This method has not yet been applied to real data because of the unavailability 
of 2D field data. In the near future, the method will be further developed for 3D 
cases and applied to data of some volcanoes in Indonesia. 
Development of an Inversion Method for Low Velocity Medium 95 
 
2 The Method 
2.1 Model Parameterization 
Model parameterization or definition of estimated variables, preceding the 
inversion process is an essential first step, because if this is not done 
appropriately, the results will not properly describe the subsurface. In other 
words, the inversion result must satisfy the physical and geological principles. 
In the case of parameterization for a subsurface structure, previous geological 
and geophysical studies provide important preliminary data. From these data, 
we do not necessarily need to create a block model; a 1D model or a boundary 
layer model may be is enough. However, in the case of something like a 
volcanic structure, a block model or knot-point model is more suitable, because 
of its heterogeneity, which makes the layers of the structure difficult to define. 
In the block model, the constant velocity or slowness is defined for each block, 
while in the knot-point model, the velocity or slowness is defined at knot point. 
In this study, slowness at a point ? ?zxs ,  in the knot-point model is defined as a 
linear interpolation ([2]) from four knot points around that point, which can be 
formulated as 
 ? ? ??
?
?
?
? ?
?
?
?
?
1 1
,,
i
in
k
km
mn
mn
z
zz
x
xx
Szxs , (1)  
where kiS ,  is the slowness at point ? ?ki zx , .  
2.2 Pseudo-Bending Method 
This method was developed by Um and Thurber [6], based on the ray path that 
is represented by a linear interpolation from a number of points. This method 
requires an initial trajectory. The initial value is optimized to obtain the final 
trajectory that satisfies the ray equation. This can be done by determining the 
normal direction of the initial ray trajectories followed by the application of the 
Fermat principle. 
Um and Thurber proposed a three-point scheme that is successively renewed 
satisfying the Fermat principle along the ray. Figure 1 shows three points 
1?ir
? , 
ir
?  
and 
1?ir
? , as well as the initial-guess point old
ir
?
. The pseudo-bending method will 
update the initial-guess point to estimate new
ir
?
. This estimation is obtained by 
considering the perturbation 
midr
?
 
which is the midpoint between 
1?ir
?
 
and 
1?ir
? . 
The vector n
?
 that expresses the bending direction is calculated by the formula 
96 Afnimar, Andri Dian Nugraha & Ahmad Syhaputra 
 
? ?
? ? tt
tt
mmvv
mmvv
n ??
??
?
????
????
?
,
 (2) 
where 
 
11
11
??
??
?
?
?
ii
ii
t
rr
rr
m ??
??
?
. (3) 
The distance R along n
?
 is obtained by minimization or application of the 
Fermat principle on the traveltime equation. 
 
Figure 1 Illustration of the three-point perturbation scheme in the pseudo-
bending method. 
2.3 Eikonal-Solver Method 
Vidale [8,9] proposed a finite difference approximation to the 2D and 3D 
eikonal equations. Of course, this finite difference scheme is applied to the 
gridded subsurface structure model. Vidale formulation is not accurate for the 
case of a heterogeneous structure because it can cause multipathing effects from 
other waves such as a head wave. Afnimar & Koketsu [7] proposed a scheme to 
solve this problem by applying the Podvin & Lecomte operator [10], and also 
provided illumination for the 2D case and propose a new operator for the 3D 
case with an illumination condition as well. 
The result of the implementation of the above scheme is a travel time at each 
grid point. If it is made its contours, it will get the wavefront. The ray can be 
calculated by tracing it from the station to the source point, considering that the 
ray direction or the wave propagation direction is always perpendicular to the 
wavefront.  
Development of an Inversion Method for Low Velocity Medium 97 
 
2.4 Gradient Inversion Method 
The function of seismic wave traveltime t  with respect to the defined 
parameter, in this case the slowness 
kiS ,  as contained in Eq. (1), is a nonlinear 
problem because of the heterogeneity of the earth structure. In the gradient 
inversion method, a nonlinearity problem can be solved by iteration of the 
linearized form of the traveltime function [1], which starts from an initial 
model. The linearization form is  
 
??
? ?
??
?
?K
k
I
i
ki
ki
tS
S
t
1 1
,
,
~ . (4) 
The traveltime derivative with respect to the slowness at a knot point can be 
formulated as a chain derivative, which involve Eq. (1) 
 
? ?
? ?
z
zz
x
xx
l
S
zxs
zxs
t
S
t
ii
zx
kiki
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
,
,,
,
,
, (5) 
where zxl ,  is a ray length at ? ?zx, . In order to ensure that the solution of matrix 
Eq. (4) is stable, it is necessary to apply damping 
 
0~ ,kiS?? . (6) 
The combination of Eqs. (4) and (6) can be written in a more compact form 
 
dSA ?? . (7) 
which can be solved by applying the LSQR method [11]. The uncertainty of the 
inversion result is calculated from the square root of the diagonal components of 
the covariance matrix  
 ? ?A
2
T
N
i
i
MN
d
AC
?
?
?
, (8) 
where N is the number of data and M  is number of parameters [12].  
3 Application to Volcano Structure Model 
In this study, we have tried to explore the application of the method described in 
section 2 to, the volcano structure as shown in Figure 2 (left). The shape of this 
98 Afnimar, Andri Dian Nugraha & Ahmad Syhaputra 
structure occurs uniquely in the volcano, where there are low-velocity 
anomalies associated with magma or fluids or weak zones. 
3.1 Model Parameterization 
To obtain an accurate inversion result, we must first define a suitable model 
parameterization. If the model parameterization is made by using a block 
model, as is mostly the case in tomography, a large number of blocks is needed 
to describe the geological model well. If the block size is 0.5 km, as shown in 
Figure 2 (middle), then the number of variables is 400. This parameterization is 
good enough to describe the model, but because of the large number of 
variables many blocks will not be crossed by rays, which will result many zero 
values in the kernel matrix. In other words, ray coverage will not be good. If the 
block size is enlarged, the number of variables will be reduced but the 
description of the model will be worse. To solve this problem, we propose to 
apply knot-point model parameterization, as shown in Figure 2 (right). With at 
distance between knot-points of 2 km, the number of variables is only 36, 
whereas the model is described much better, as shown Figure 2 (left). Hence, 
this parameterization is very effective compared to the block model. Slowness 
distribution at a certain point is calculated using Eq. (1). 
 
Figure 2 Left: Low velocity model (red). Middle: Parameterizing the model 
using blocks with a size of 0.5 km. Right: Parameterizing the model using knot 
points with distance between points of 2 km. 
3.2 Selection of Ray Tracing Method 
Parameter determination as described above is followed by the selection of a 
suitable ray tracing method. Application of the pseudo-bending method on this 
model will encounter an instability problem, which occurs in the ray calculation 
marked by the dashed white line in Figure 3 (left). This is caused by the large 
velocity gradient. Gradient calculation using Eq. (2) is needed for the 
minimization of the ray trajectory, but because the gradient is large, it will result 
in no solution. A serious problem is the inaccuracy of this method, because it 
does not follow the Fermat principle. For example, rays from a source number 
7, see (Figure 3 left), that should ÅgavoidÅh low-velocity zones and should pass 
Development of an Inversion Method for Low Velocity Medium 99 
 
the high-velocity zones, where the traveltime will be shorter. Likewise rays 
from other source points. Another problem with the method is that it requires an 
initial trajectory. Usually, the initial trajectory is a straight line, as shown in 
Figure 1. If the velocity structure is not too heterogeneous, the trajectory 
optimization performed by this method will get the ÅgrealÅh raypath (the one 
which has the smallest travel time). However, for a very heterogeneous velocity 
structure, which contains low-velocity anomalies, this is not a good method, 
because the selection of the initial trajectory close to the actual trajectory is very 
difficult. As a result, the trajectory obtained will not turn out as expected. 
 
Figure 3 Left: Application of the pseudo-bending method [6]. Right: 
Application of the eikonal-solver method [7]. 
To overcome the above problems, in this research, we have applied the eikonal-
solver method. The result, as shown in Figure 3 (right), shows that all rays can 
be calculated properly. The high velocity gradient problem can be solved, 
because the calculation method does not involve the velocity gradient, as is the 
case in the pseudo-bending method. Ray trajectories obtained with this method 
can avoid low-velocity zones and pass high-velocity zones. This satisfies the 
Fermat principle, according to which the travel path must pass through a zone in 
the minimum traveltime. 
3.3 Application of Gradient Inversion Method 
As explained in Section 2.4, the concept of this inversion is the minimization of 
the theoretical traveltime and the observational traveltime, which is done 
iteratively starting from initial model to get the optimal final model. In order to 
test the method developed in this study, we have applied to a synthetic data. The 
observational traveltime is the traveltime calculated in the model in Figure 2 
(left). To approach the field conditions, where field data always contain noise, 
the data were added with Gaussian noise. The initial model applied in the 
inversion was 1D model that is commonly used in tomography. It was taken 
from the left or right side of the velocity model in Figure 2, from 2 km/s (on the 
surface) to 6 km/s (at the basement). 
100 Afnimar, Andri Dian Nugraha & Ahmad Syhaputra 
This synthetic model involves nine source points and nine receivers on the 
surface. Consequently, there are 81 observational data with 36 parameters. 
Gaussian noise with mean level 2.00.0 ???  is included in the observational 
data. To avoid instability in the matrix inversion, norm damping 0.5??  was 
applied. The inversion was performed in eight iterations and the solution was 
the result whose RMS traveltime difference between two iterations was small 
enough.  
The inversion result using the observational data without noise is shown in 
Figure 4. The selected result is the fourth iteration, where the RMS value was 
relatively close to the subsequent iteration result. This result could very well be 
close to the desired model. The uncertainty is smaller than 0.3 km/s. The 
biggest uncertainties are at the bottom of the model, because of little ray 
coverage compared to the top of the model. For the data with a noise level of 
0.1, the inversion result, see (Figure 5 middle), still shows the desired output. 
The uncertainty, see (Figure 5 right) is still very good for the low-velocity zone, 
which is about 0.25 km/s. For data with higher noise levels, as in Figure 6, the 
inversion result is less comprehensive compared to the desired output. 
 
Figure 4 Inversion result with damping 0.5??  
and Gaussian noise level 
0.0?? . Left: RMS values of traveltime residual versus iteration. Middle: 
Inversion result image at the fourth iteration. Right: Uncertainty of inversion 
results. 
 
Figure 5 Inversion results with damping 0.5??  
and Gaussian noise level 
1.0?? . Left: RMS travel time residual versus iteration. Middle: Inversion result 
image at the third iteration. Right: Uncertainty of inversion result. 
Development of an Inversion Method for Low Velocity Medium 101 
 
Overall, the inversion result can successfully reconstruct the low-velocity zones. 
The key of this inversion result is the appropriate model parameterization, 
followed by a suitable method of ray tracing, so the rays can travel through all 
areas between four knot points.  
 
Figure 6 Inversion results with damping 0.5??  and Gaussian noise level 
2.0?? . Left: RMS value of traveltime residual versus iteration. Middle: 
Inversion result image at the third iteration. Right: Uncertainty of inversion 
result. 
For comparison, we have also performed an inversion using the same data, but 
now applying block-model parameterization and calculating the rays using the 
pseudo-bending method that is commonly applied in tomography. With model 
parameterization as shown in Figure 2 (middle), the inversion result shown in 
Figure 7 (left) does not approach the desired output. This is probably caused by 
the inappropriate ray calculation, as discussed in section 3.2. Attempting to 
improve the ray coverage, we enlarged the block size to 1 km and 1.5 km; the 
inversion results are shown in Figure 7 (middle and right). The low-velocity 
anomaly in the deep targets could be somewhat resolved, but it doesnÅft describe 
the subsurface structure well, because the block size is too large. 
 
Figure 7 Inversion results with block model and pseudo-bending, damping 
0.2??
 
and without noise. Left: Inversion result for block size 0.5 km. Middle: 
Inversion result for block size 1 km. Right: Inversion result for block size 1.5 
km. 
102 Afnimar, Andri Dian Nugraha & Ahmad Syhaputra 
4 Conclusion 
In this study, firstly, an appropriate model parameterization for low velocity 
zones using knot points has been successfully developed. The knot-point model 
reduces the number of inversion variables, but it can describe the subsurface 
structure very well. Secondly, the eikonal-solver method can overcome the 
problems of the pseudo-bending method with, high-velocity gradients and ray 
trajectories that do not conform to the Fermat principle. Thirdly, considering 
these two points, the inversion results of the proposed method can reconstruct 
low-velocity zones well. This is achieved by appropriately describing the 
structure and calculating the precise ray tracing. On the other hand, application 
of the inversion method using a block model and the pseudo-bending method 
doesnÅft produce good inversion results. 
Acknowledgements 
This research is supported by the Capacity Improvement Research Program ITB 
2010. We thank Dr. Shutaro Sekine and the other reviewers for their 
contribution to improving our manuscript. 
References 
[1] Zelt, C.A. & R.B. Smith, Seismic Traveltime Inversion for 2-D Custal 
Velocity Structure, Geophys. J. Int, 108, pp. 16-34, 1992. 
[2] Afnimar, Koketsu, K. & Nakagawa, K., Joint Inversion of Refraction and 
Gravity Data for Three-Dimensional Topography of A Sediment 
Basement-Interface, Geophys. J. Int., 151, pp. 243-254, 2002. 
[3] Nugraha, A.D. & Mori, J., Three-Dimensional Velocity Structure in The 
Bungo Channel and Shikoku Area, Japan, and Its Relationship to Low-
Frequency Earthquakes, Geophys. Res. Lett, 33, L24307. doi:10.1029/ 
2006GL028479, 2006.  
[4] Zhao, D., Hasegawa, A. & Horiuchi, S., Tomographic Imaging of Pand S 
Wave Velocity Structure Beneath Northeastern Japan, J. Geophys. Res., 
97, pp. 19909?19928, 1992. 
[5] Miyazawa, M. & Kato, M., On Interpolation Functions in Traveltime 
Tomography, Geophys. J. Int., 158, pp.169-178, 2004. 
[6] Um, J. & Thurber, C.H., A Fast Algorithm for Two-Point Seismic Ray 
Tracing, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 77, pp. 972-986, 1987. 
[7] Afnimar & Koketsu, K., Finite-Difference Traveltime Calculation for 
Head Waves Traveling Along an Irregular Interface, Geophys. J. Int, 
143, pp. 729-734, 2000. 
[8] Vidale, J., Finite-Difference Calculation of Traveltimes, Bull. Seism. Soc. 
Am., 78, pp. 2062-2076, 1988. 
Development of an Inversion Method for Low Velocity Medium 103 
 
[9] Vidale, J., Finite-Difference Calculation of Traveltimes in Three 
Dimensions, Geophysics, 55, pp. 521-526, 1990.  
[10] Podvin, P. & Lecomte, I., Finite-Difference Computation of Traveltimes 
in Very Contrasted Velocity Models: A Massively Parallel Approach and 
Its Associated Tools, Geophys. J. Int, 105, pp. 271-284, 1991. 
[11] Paige, C.C. & Saunders, M.A., LSQR: An Algorithm for Sparse Linear 
Equations and Sparse Least Squares, ACM Trans. Math. Soft., pp. 43-71, 
195-209, 1982. 
[12] Grandis, H., Pengantar Pemodelan Inversi Geofisika, Himpunan Ahli 
Geofisika Indonesia (HAGI), 2009. 
 
 
 
