 238 
 
ITB J. Eng. Sci., Vol. 44, No. 3, 2012, 238-251 
 
 
Received November 10
th
, 2010, Revised June 14
th
, 2011, 2
nd
 Revision September 29
th
, 2011, 3
rd
 Revision 
February 23
rd
, 2012, 4
th
 Revision April 24
th
, 2012, 5
th
 Revison August 2
nd
, 2012, Accepted for publication 
September 13
th
, 2012. 
Copyright ? 2012 Published by LPPM ITB & PII, ISSN: 1978-3051, DOI: 10.5614/itbj.eng.sci.2012.44.3.3 
The Effect of Ozonation Process on Bromide-Containing 
Groundwaters in Bandung Area and Its Surroundings  
Mindriany Syafila, Sukandar & Eric Haryanto 
Faculty of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Institut Teknologi Bandung 
Jalan Ganesha 10 Bandung, Jawa Barat 40132, Indonesia 
Email: mindri@ftsl.itb.ac.id 
 
 
Abstract. Disinfection process was applied as the last step of the water treatment 
to kill pathogenic bacteria in the water. However, according to several studies, 
the ozonation disinfection process could form undesired by-products. One of the 
by-products potentially affecting human life is bromate produced from bromide 
ionic-containing water.  This study was carried out to examine the effect of raw 
water characteristics and pH on bromate formation. Also, the performance of 
bromate formation for a period of exposure time was analyzed. Raw waters taken 
from four different areas around Bandung were exposed to ozone introduced to a 
reactor with a flow rate of 2 L/min. The pH of the raw waters varied from 4, 7 to 
10. The results show that there was no evidence of an initial bromide ion 
concentration, whereas a change in pH value gives a significantly different 
outcome. In acidic condition (pH of 4) the bromate formation tends to decrease, 
whereas when the pH value increases to a pH of 10, the bromate formation 
increases. Therefore, for drinking water with a neutral pH, when bromide ions 
are detected in the raw water, the drinking water may be toxic due to the 
presence of bromate. 
Keywords: bromate; disinfection; groundwater; ozonation; pH. 
1 Introduction  
Drinking water is very important for human life. The daily need for drinking 
water per person varies from 2.1 liter to 2.8 liter, depending on weight and 
activity. Most of this drinking water is supplied by local authorities through 
treated-water supply systems. However, the quantity and quality of the drinking 
water produced cannot fulfill the demand. Therefore, some private companies 
produce bottled water. Since some of those private companies are home 
industries, they obtain the groundwater from locally, ranging from fresh 
environments to densely populated areas. In the Bandung area, the 
Tangkubanperahu area is an example of a fresh environment, while Ciumbuleuit 
is an example of a densely populated area. The groundwater characteristics of 
these areas could be affected by the activities that take place in those areas. For 
Ozonation Process Effect on Bromide-Containing Groundwaters   239  
 
example, a public transportation station is located at Ledeng, and a traditional 
market can be found in Lembang. 
Most private companies use surface water treatment to produce bottled drinking 
water. A disinfection process is applied as the last step of the treatment to kill 
pathogenic bacteria contained in the water. Ozonation is one of the most-used 
disinfection techniques worldwide [1]. It is believed that the ozonation 
technique is more efficient than other disinfection techniques [2].   
Ozone (O3) is a strong oxidator that can rapidly react with microorganisms and 
organic substances contained in water, so its action as a disinfectant is stronger 
than chlorine compounds [2]. Therefore, ozone is an excellent disinfectant for 
inactivating undesired pathogens. Furthermore, it can also be used to deactivate 
some viral and protozoa pathogens [2,3].  
Ozone can also remove odor and taste as well as toxic compounds and 
micropollutants. However, according to several studies, the disinfection process 
by ozonation can form undesired by-products because of the high ozone 
exposure necessary for inactivating the microorganisms [2]. The disinfection 
by-products can be classified in three categories, i.e. non-brominated organic 
compounds, brominated organic compounds, and halogenates [4]. 
 
Figure 1 Bromate formation mechanism [5]. 
One of the undesired disinfection by-products affecting human life is bromate 
produced in bromide ions-containing water. Bromate formation includes 
reactions with molecular ozone and with OH radicals, which is a complicated 
mechanism [4]. The key reactions of bromate formation are shown in Figure 1. 
The oxidation of bromide to hypobromous acid (HOBr-) is influenced by the 
presence of ozone, while further oxidations take place mostly through OH 
radicals. The formation of bromate compounds raises the particular problem 
240 Mindriany Syafila, Sukandar & Eric Haryanto 
that they cannot be further removed biologically after the disinfection process 
[2]. 
Bromate is a genotoxic human carcinogen [6]. This bromate compound can 
cause loss of hearing, and decline of kidney and intestinal functions [7]. Delker, 
et al. [8] also mention the kidney as the major target organ for bromate as well 
as other effects such as peritoneal and follicular thyroid cancer. Therefore, the 
characteristics of raw water in relation to bromate formation should be 
considered.  
Several studies have been carried out to analyze the effects of different water 
quality parameters on bromate formation. One of the results showed that 
bromate formation could be caused by an increased bromide concentration [9, 
10]. Moreover, the bromate concentration increases as the ozone dose increases. 
Therefore, the ozone dose and also the ozone residual play an important role in 
bromate formation [10].  
Besides the ozone dose, bromate formation could also be affected by the 
presence of hydroxyl radicals, as mentioned above [4,11]. In this case, the 
higher the amount of hydroxyl radicals present, the higher the bromate 
formation will be [12]. In the bromate formation mechanism, hydroxyl radicals 
form hypobromite radicals in bromide ions-containing water. The hypobromite 
radical is unstable and easily degrades to hypobromite and bromite, which will 
then oxidize to form bromate. Figure 1 can be expressed as the following 
equations [13]: 
 Br
-
 + O3 + H2O ? HOBr + O2 + OH
-
 (1) 
 HOBr + H2O ? H3O
+
 + OBr
-
  (2) 
 OBr
-
 + 2 O3 ? BrO3
-
 + 2 O2 (3) 
 HOBr + O3 ? no reaction (4) 
These equations show that bromide will be oxidized by ozone to form bromate 
with the intermediate product of hypobromite. The ozone present will not 
oxidize hypobromous acid to bromate. The hypobromous acid will be formed 
under acid conditions and it is suggested that the formation of bromate could be 
minimized at low pH levels. Therefore, pH is another factor affecting bromate 
formation in bromide-containing waters [4,10,14].  
Ozonation Process Effect on Bromide-Containing Groundwaters   241  
 
2 Materials and Methods 
The experiments for this research were carried out at the Water Treatment 
Engineering Laboratory at the Faculty of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
Institut Teknologi Bandung. A reactor with a diameter of 15 cm and a volume 
of 7 liter was used as a contactor between the ozone and the raw water. An 
ozone generator (Sanyo ACS-PRF1) linked to an aerator was used to produce 
the ozone introduced to the reactor. A schematic diagram of the apparatus is 
shown in Figure 2. Raw water with a flow rate of 2 L/min was exposed to the 
ozone. 
Aerator Regulator Valve Ozon Generator Reactor
Influent
 
Figure 2 Schematic diagram of the ozonation process reactor. 
The ozonation experiment was carried out under batch conditions.  The ground 
waters were taken from four different areas, i.e. the residential area of 
Ciumbuleuit, the public transportation station area of Ledeng, the traditional 
market area of Lembang and the rural area of Tangkubanperahu. The maximum 
contact time of the disinfection process was 60 minutes, and the first contact 
was measured after 3 minutes of exposure. The ozone dose applied for the 
groundwater ozonation processes was calculated by multiplying the flow rate 
with the contact time applied. Three different pH values of raw water were 
applied, 4, 7 and 10, respectively.  
The parameters analyzed in this work include pH value, bromate concentration 
and remaining ozone concentration. The pH was detected using a pH meter 
(Orion SN5732). Prior to the pH measurement, Standard Method 4500-H
+
B 
[15] calibrations of the probe were conducted using buffered solutions at a pH 
of 4, 7, and 10. 
The remaining dissolved ozone was measured using an indigo colorimetric 
method based on the Standard Method 4500-O3 Indigo Colorimetric Method 
[15]. The samples were analyzed using a Spectronic 20 Genesys 
spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 600 nm. Since the upper limit of this 
242 Mindriany Syafila, Sukandar & Eric Haryanto 
method is 2.5 mg/L, diluted samples were used to determine the higher ozone 
concentrations. 
Bromate concentrations were analyzed using a spectrophotometer (Spectronic 
20 Genesys) with a wavelength of 530 nm, based on the Standard Method 4500-
Br
-
 Phenol Red Colorimetric Method [15].  
3 Results and Discussion 
3.1 Raw Water Characteristics and Bromate Formation  
Raw waters were taken from four different areas surrounding Bandung, i.e. 
groundwater from Ciumbuleuit, Ledeng, Lembang and Tangkubanperahu. The 
characteristics of the raw waters were examined, including the following 
parameters: pH, temperature, bromide concentration, chloride concentration, 
manganese and ferri concentration as well as turbidity and alkalinity, as shown 
in Table 1. 
Table 1 The characteristics of raw water samples used. 
Parameter 
Ciumbuleuit 
groundwater 
Ledeng 
groundwater 
Lembang 
groundwater 
Tangkubanperahu 
groundwater 
pH 7.03 6.82 6.87 7.26 
Temperature (oC) 25.4 23.5 23.2 20.8 
Chloride (mg/L) 22.60 4.52 26.12 21.60 
Manganese (mg/L) 0 0 0 0 
Fe2+  (mg/L) 0.143 0.046 0.035 0.088 
Turbidity (NTU) 1 1 1 1 
Ammonia (as mg/L 
NH4
+) 
0 0 0 0 
Ion bromide 
(mg/L) 
0.33 0.2 0.6 0.4 
Bromate (ug/L) 0 0 0 0 
The above table shows that the pH values of all raw waters display a neutral 
condition. However, the bromide concentrations were slightly different in each 
case. The highest bromide concentration was found in the Lembang 
groundwater sample. All of the groundwater samples were exposed to ozone 
with similar initial doses.  
3.2 Bromate Formation as a Function of Ph Value for All Raw 
Waters 
One of the affecting factors in bromate formation is the pH value. In this work 
the pH of the raw waters used was altered to achieve an acidic condition (pH 4), 
a neutral condition (pH 7) and a base condition (pH 10). Figure 3 shows the 
Ozonation Process Effect on Bromide-Containing Groundwaters   243  
 
remaining ozone concentration at certain time intervals during the 60-minute 
ozonation process. It seems that after 15 minutes of exposure, the remaining 
ozone concentration remained constant in all raw waters used. This means that a 
longer time exposure would not increase the remaining ozone concentration.   
During the ozonation process under the acidic condition there was evidence that 
no bromate was formed. The lack of bromate formation might due to the change 
of the initial bromide ions into hypobromous acid (HOBr). Under acidic 
conditions the equilibrium tends to produce more hypobromous acid. Therefore, 
it seems that the concentration of this acid would increase, which could prevent 
the formation of bromate [5]. 
Based on the results of the acidic-condition experiment, it seems that the initial 
bromide ion concentration was not the determining factor. However, the pH 
value has an important role since the pH under an acidic condition (in this case 
pH 4) could prevent bromate formation. 
.  
Figure 3 The remaining ozone concentration during the ozonation process at 
pH 4. 
As the pH value was increased to achieve the normal condition (a pH of 7), the 
longer the exposure time the higher the remaining ozone concentration in the 
reactor, as shown in Figure 4. It seems that the high ozone concentration could 
lead to bromate formation, as shown in Figure 5. 
At the beginning of the experiment, there was still no bromate formation. 
However, after 15 minutes of exposure the bromate formation tended to be 
constant, which is supported by another research, that shows that the optimum 
contact time for ozonation is in the range of 5-15 minutes [2]. This means that a 
longer exposure time would not produce more bromate but it would increase the 
244 Mindriany Syafila, Sukandar & Eric Haryanto 
remaining ozone concentration. This result differs from that of Kalmaz, et al. 
[16] where a higher ozone concentration gave a higher bromate formation. 
Therefore, it could be concluded that at a normal pH of 7 after 15 minutes of 
exposure there is no correlation between the remaining ozone concentration and 
the bromate formation. 
 
Figure 4 The remaining ozone concentration during ozonation at pH 7. 
 
Figure 5 The bromate concentration during ozonation at pH 7. 
According to the bromate formation mechanism shown in Figure 1, ionic 
bromide will expose the ozone to catalytic decomposition to form hypobromite 
as an intermediate product. The further reaction of hypobromite with the 
remaining ozone produces bromite, which easily oxidizes to form bromate. The 
predominant species formed at a higher pH value was hypobromite. At a lower 
pH value it seems that the formation of hypobromous acid might be taken place. 
Since this acid would not react with ozone, bromate formation could be 
minimized. 
Ozonation Process Effect on Bromide-Containing Groundwaters   245  
 
The results of this experiment show that at a base pH (= 10) the remaining 
ozone concentration seems to be smaller than at a lower pH value (Figure 6). 
Hence, the bromate formation tends to increase, as shown in Figure 7. Due to 
more hydroxyl radicals, it might be formed at a higher pH value [16]. 
 
Figure 6 The remaining ozone concentration during ozonation at pH 10. 
 
Figure 7 The bromate concentration during ozonation at pH 10. 
From the above explanation it seems that in applying ozonation in a disinfection 
process, the optimum ozone dose should be determined, being the dose applied 
for removing most bacterial pathogens without any bromate formation occuring. 
Furthermore, if the raw waters have a neutral pH and also contain bromide, a 
preliminary process for decreasing the pH value has to be applied prior to the 
disinfection process in order to minimize bromate formation. Some 
technologies can be considered, such as using a magnetic ion exchange resin 
[17], adsorption by silica zeolites [18], or using cerium dioxide during the 
ozonation process [19]). Post treatment of the disinfection process could also be 
246 Mindriany Syafila, Sukandar & Eric Haryanto 
considered since there is a possibility of bromate being formed, as mentioned by 
Marhaba and Bengraine [20]. 
3.3 Bromate Formation Kinetics 
The ozonation performance as a function of ozonation contact time was 
analyzed for each raw water, which led to bromate formation kinetics. Figure 8 
shows the relationship between the bromate concentration formed and the 
exposure time of the ozonation process related to the characteristics of the 
Ciumbuleuit, Ledeng, Lembang, and Tangkubanperahu groundwaters, 
respectively. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 8 Bromate formation kinetics during ozonation applied to groundwater 
from: a) Ciumbuleuit, b) Ledeng, c) Lembang, and d) Tangkubanperahu. 
Ozonation Process Effect on Bromide-Containing Groundwaters   247  
 
Figure 8 shows that a determination factor of 0.80 was achieved for all 
groundwaters at any pH level. This means that there was a strong relationship 
between time of exposure and bromate concentration formation. At the earlier 
exposure time of up to 20 minutes, the increase in bromate concentration was in 
a logarithmic phase, whereas after an exposure time of 20 up to 60 minutes the 
bromate concentration tended to be constant. The above figure shows that the 
bromate formation rate seems to be similar. It could be concluded that there 
would be an optimum contact time for bromate formation, where the longer the 
contact time applied the less significant the amount of bromate produced. The 
same phenomenon was also obtained with the raw waters with a pH of 7 and of 
10, respectively. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 9 The bromate formation rate as a function of contact time at pH 7. 
248 Mindriany Syafila, Sukandar & Eric Haryanto 
The rate of bromate produced can be determined as a function of the bromide 
concentration, whereas the overall reaction based on Eqs. (1)?(4) [13] would be: 
 Br
-
 + 3 O3 + 2 H2O ? BrO3
-
 + H3O
+
 + O2 + OH
-
 (5) 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 10 The bromate formation rate as a function of contact time at pH 10. 
Therefore, it is assumed that the reaction would be first order. However, since 
bromate might be the end product of the ozonation process of bromide-
contaning raw water, the bromate formation rate could be determined as being 
zero order, where the reaction rate would be expressed as (in molar basis):  
 d[BrO3
-
] / dt = k  (6) 
with boundary conditions of at t = 0, then [BrO3
-
] = [BrO3
-
]0, and at t = t, then 
[BrO3
-
] = [BrO3
-
], the equations can be written as: 
Ozonation Process Effect on Bromide-Containing Groundwaters   249  
 
 [BrO3
-
]t = kt + [BrO3
-
]0  (7) 
 If at t = 0, [BrO3
-
]0 = 0, then the equations can be written as: 
 [BrO3
-
] = kt  (8) 
A plot of [BrO3
-
] versus t will yield a line with a slope equal to positive k. 
From Eq. (8), the relationship between the bromate formation rate and the 
contact time can be plotted as in Figure 9 for pH 7 and Figure 10 for pH 10, 
where the slope is equal to positive k. 
Figure 9 shows that the bromate formation rate at pH 7 seems to be not 
significantly different for all raw waters, with a range of 0.022?0.034 
ɠg/L/minute. This phenomenon also occurred at pH 10 (see Figure 10) with the 
bromate formation rate ranging from 0.052 up to 0.067 ɠg/L/minute. However, 
it seems that the bromate formation rate at pH 10 was higher than at pH 7. 
Therefore, the ozonation process has to be carefully applied for groundwater or 
water resources with a pH of 10 since the amount of bromate produced would 
be higher compared to acidic and neutral water resources. Hence, since the 
quality standard for drinking water requires a neutral pH, the bromate formation 
rate should be considered if bromide-containing raw water is used as a water 
supply source. 
4 Conclusions 
The pH value plays an important role, since the pH under an acidic condition (in 
this case pH 4) could prevent bromate formation. It could be concluded that 
with a normal pH of 7 after 15 minutes of exposure there was no correlation 
between the remaining ozone concentration and bromate formation. The higher 
the pH value, the more bromate formation in bromide-containing raw water 
occurs if ozonation is applied as a disinfection process. Since the pH value of 
drinking water should be neutral, it seems we ought to know the raw water 
characteristics. If the raw water tends to contain bromide it could become 
carcinogenic when the ozonation disinfection process is applied. Therefore, if 
the ozonation process will be applied to bromide-containing water at a neutral 
pH, it seems other processes should be considered as preliminary treatment, as 
well as post-treatment of the ozonation process. 
References 
[1] Montgomery, J.M., Water Treatment: Principles and Design, A Wiley 
Interscience Pub., 1985. 
250 Mindriany Syafila, Sukandar & Eric Haryanto 
[2] Von Gunten, U., Ozonation of Drinking Water: Part II. Disinfection and 
By-Product Formation in Presence of Bromide, Iodide, Chlorine, Water 
Research, 37, pp. 1469-1487, 2003. 
[3] Von Gunten, U., Driedger, A., Gallard, H. & Salhi, E., Rapid 
Communication By-Products Formation During Drinking Water 
Disinfection: A Tool to Assess Disinfection Efficiency?, Water Research, 
35(8), pp. 2095-2099, 2001. 
[4] Von Gunten, U. & Pinkernell, U., Ozonation of Bromide-Containing 
Drinking Waters: A Delicate Balance between Disinfection and Bromate 
Formation, Water Science and Technology, 41, pp. 53-69, 2000. 
[5] Von Gunten, U. & Hoigne, J., Bromate Formation During Ozonation-
Containing Water, Proc. 11
th
 Ozone World Congress, Int. Ozone Assoc., 
S942-S949, 1993. 
[6] Aljundi, I.H., Bromate Formation during Ozonation of Drinking Water: 
A Response Surface Methodology Study, Desalination, 277(1-3), pp. 24-
28, 2011. 
[7] Kruithof, J.C., Disinfection by-product Formation, NV PWN Water 
Supply Co., 2002. 
[8] Delker, D., Hatch, H., Allen, J., Crissman, B., George, M., Geter, D., 
Kilburn, S., Moore, T., Nelson, G., Roop, B., Slade, R., Swank, A., 
Ward, W. & DeAngeol, A., Molecular Biomarkers of Oxidative Stress 
Associated with Bromate Carcinogenicity, Toxicology, 221, pp. 158-165, 
2006. 
[9] Song, R.P., Westerhoff, P., Minear, R. & Amy, G., Bromate 
Minimization During Ozonation, J. American Water Works Assoc., 89, 
pp. 69-78, 1997. 
[10] Peldszus, S., Andrews, S.A., Souza, R., Smith, F., Douglas, I., Bolton, J. 
& Huck, P.M., Effect of Medium-Pressure UV Irradiation on Bromated 
Concentrations in Drinking Water, A Pilot-Scale Study, Water Research, 
38, pp. 211-217, 2004. 
[11] Haag, W.R. & Hoigne, J., Ozonation of Bromide-Containing Water: 
Kinetic of Formation of Hypobromous Acid and Bromate, Environmental 
Science and Technology, 17, pp. 261-267, 1983. 
[12] Westerhoff , P., Amy, G., Song, R. & Minear, R., Simplifying Bromate 
Formation Kinetics Analysis with A Linear Bromate Yield Concept, ACS 
Books, pp. 322-349, 1996. 
[13] Kumar, A., Rout, S. & Singhal, R.K., Health Risk Assessment for 
Bromate (Bro3
-
) Traces in Ozonated Indian Bottled Water, Journal of 
Environmental Protection, 2, pp. 571-580, 2011. 
[14] Legube, B., Parinet, B., Gelinet, K., Berne, F. & Croue, J.-P., Modeling of 
Bromate Formation by Ozonation of Surface Waters in Drinking Water 
Treatment, Water Research, 38(8), pp. 2185-2195, 2004. 
Ozonation Process Effect on Bromide-Containing Groundwaters   251  
 
[15] Eaton, A.D., Clesceri, L.S. & Greenberg, A.E. (eds), Standard Methods 
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American Public Health 
Association, 21
st
 Edition, Washington D.C., 2005. 
[16] Kalmaz, E.E., Eraslan, A.H. & Kim, A.H., A Preliminary Kinetics Model 
Predicting Concentration Variations of Hypobromous Acid and 
Bromated In Ozonated Marine Water, Ecological Modeling, 29, pp. 315-
326, 1985. 
[17] Johnson, C.J. & Singer, P.C., Impact of A Magnetic Ion Exchange Resin 
on Ozone Demand and Bromate Formation During Drinking Water 
Treatment, Water Research, 38(17), pp. 3738-3750, 2004. 
[18] Sagehashi, M., Shiraishi, K., Fujita, H., Fujii, T. & Sakoda, A., Ozone 
Decomposition of 2-Methylisoborneol (MIB) in Adsorption Phase on 
High Silica Zeolites with Preventing Bromate Formation, Water 
Research, 39(13), pp. 2926-2934, 2005. 
[19] Zhang, T., Chen, W., Ma, J. & Qiang, Z., Minimizing Bromated 
Formation with Cerium Dioxide During Ozonation of Bromide-
Containing Water, Water Research, 42(14), pp. 3651-3658, 2008. 
[20] Marhaba, T.F. & Bengraine, K., Review Strategies for Minimizing 
Bromate Formation Resulting from Drinking Water Ozonation, 
Engineering Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy, 5(2), pp. 
101-112, 2003. 
 
 
