  
ITB J. Vis. Art & Des., Vol. 3, No. 2, 2009, 103-114                      103 
 
Design Issues and Information Contents of the Provincial 
Government Websites of Indonesia: A Content Analysis on 
Visual Messages 
Achmad Syarief
1
, Agung Eko Budiwaspada
2
, Irfansyah
2
 &                                       
Ifa Shafira Mustikadara
2
   
1 Research Group of Human and Industrial Product Design, FSRD, ITB ? Indonesia 
2 Research Group of Visual Communication and Multimedia, FSRD, ITB ? Indonesia 
 
 
Abstract. A website is not just merely act as an object of displaying information, 
but it also represents a contextual medium of communication through visuals and 
contents. The interplay of website design elements builds up meanings that affect 
users beyond what previous communication practices have uncovered. Previous 
research acknowledges that visuals and contents have significant effects in 
attracting usersÅe attention and trust. Thus, the ability of a website to provide 
credible information through visuals and contents to target users is therefore 
plays great importance in the success of a website. However, although a 
considerable number of researches on website design have been performed, 
study in understanding the characteristics of siteÅes visual appearances and 
information contents for the purpose of promoting local investment in Indonesia 
has been very limited. This paper addresses visual design issues and information 
contents of eighteen provincial government websites of Indonesia. Through 
content analysis, the paper comparatively examines visual appearances, 
information contents, and functions of each website, in order to determine visual 
characteristics and contents that suit the purpose of promoting local potencies. 
The paper focuses on commonality, discrepancy, and pattern of contents, provide 
suggestions to improve the use of provincial government website design of 
Indonesia. 
Keywords: content analysis; visual messages; website design; web information. 
1 Introduction  
Public service websites, especially those of provincial governments in 
Indonesia, are common to find and accessed by public. Yet, with so many 
expensed budget and efforts that they put into, most of those websites still do 
not appeal to general users not to mention those who have special interests for 
investments. A rough preliminary browsing on those websites indicate that most 
provincial government websites do not present cognitive appeal, such as visual 
attractiveness in their page appearances, ease of use in information contents, 
and ease of navigation. Previous researches on usersÅe acceptance toward 
presented information and visuals on website show that visuals and page 
104 Achmad Syarief, et al. 
appearance influence the way users accept and react to a website [1,2]. Further, 
the quality of visual appearance on page affects the perceived level of 
credibility and trustworthiness of those websites [3-5]. Yet, with so many 
studies on website designs, structures, and information contents; none is found 
to objectively assess the cognitive appeal of information and presented visuals 
of provincial government websites in Indonesia, especially commonalities, 
discrepancies, and patterns of the presented websites. To address the presented 
issue, this study comparatively examines 18 (eighteen) provincial government 
websites of Indonesia as samples, using content analysis as method of analysis. 
The study aims to identify characteristics of content and visual presentation of 
those websites, in order to map visual tendencies and its information suitability 
as media for promoting and informing local potencies. 
2 Theoretical Framework on the Interactive Aspects of Visuals 
on Web Environment 
Many websites have not been necessarily designed with the users in mind. In 
many cases, websites were designed and engineered to perform merely a set of 
interactions, using menus and links with icons, symbols, and/or graphics, 
especially when recent software development can help novice users to build a 
website in an easy and available way. However, while the sites may effectively 
work from program-performance -related perspective, it is often at the expense 
of how the sites are viewed and actually used by the real users. Previous 
research by Kim-Moon [6] mentioned that when users do the browse with 
purposes in mind, the necessity to consider the aesthetics aspect of web pages is 
increased. This is because aesthetics impression was found to influence both 
usersÅe memories and their decisions process [6,7]. As later mentioned by 
Schenkman and JonssonÅes study [8] beauty is found to be primary predictor of 
overall impression and preferences of websites, suggesting that aesthetics is a 
strong determinant of pleasure, experienced by the users during web-interaction. 
Therefore, recognizing and understanding the trade-offs between performance-
related issues and visualized contents of a website are important, because it 
might assist web designers to aware on the consequences of arranging and 
prioritizing different combination of web elements. Accordingly, having the 
knowledge of these trade-offs can helped web designers to optimize the context 
of web use, the task at hand, and to be more focus on reaching the intended 
users.  
The appearance of a website is not just merely created through the practice of 
usability and applying technical standard, but also results of an evolving design 
activity that transforms a web page appearance into a visual communication 
medium. The interplay of website visual elements builds up meanings that 
affect users beyond what previous communication technology practices have 
 Design Issues and Information Contents of the Provincial 105 
 
uncovered. Previous research acknowledges that visually appealing website has 
significant effects in attracting usersÅe attention and trust [1]. Thus, the ability of 
web designers to create web pages that are easily interpreted yet visually 
appealing to more target users is therefore of great importance in the success of 
websites. However, according to Jakob Nielsen [9], no matter how sophisticated 
every visual representation (on the web) is, the perceptual differences (such as 
language and cultural representation) will still remain. A visual representation 
that was designed and developed in one culture and/or geographical domain but 
used in another has a high probability to receive Å\new? interpretation. We may 
not trust the original appeal of visual representations to be necessarily and 
equally usable around the world. Previous researches [10-12] suggest that what 
is meaningful and natural for one group may be ambiguous, unintelligible, and 
inappropriate for other groups. Therefore, presenting largely accepted visual 
appearances, such as those on the WWW, should be considered thoughtfully 
and carefully. Nielsen [9] notes that Å\Åcsometimes cultural conditions may have 
fundamental impact on the very structure of user interfaces which are not just a 
matter of translations?. This might have interesting consequences on the use of 
website as a medium to present and to inform information through visual 
contents in a diverse cultural setting, such as Indonesia. 
3 Method 
This study applied quantitative description of content analysis method to 
identify differences (commonalities, discrepancies, and/or functions) of visuals 
and information contents of sample websites. As explained by Berelson [13], 
content analysis is Å\a research technique for the objective, systematic, and 
quantitative description of the manifest of communication.? 
3.1 Phases and procedures of analysis  
To address characteristic of contents and visuals of websites, the study 
conducted 3 (three) phases of investigation:  
(1) Phase 1: Survey, aimed to collect actual data of provincial government 
websites of Indonesia. This was conducted through online browsing, surveying 
the visual of identified websites. In this phase, all identified provincial 
government websites of Indonesia (33 websites) were browsed and marked 
according to their accessibility points: 
1. Can it be accessed or not? 
2. Does it provide accessible links or not? 
3. Does it regularly updated or not? 
4. Does it provide accessible information or not? 
106 Achmad Syarief, et al. 
Those that cannot be accessed, either because of still under construction or non 
updated contents, will not be used as samples for identification and analysis of 
websites. 
(2) Phase 2: Identification and Analysis, aimed to develop measurement items, 
to select and to analyze samples of provincial government websites of Indonesia 
that are accessible, provide clickable links, and regularly updated. Those 
selected provincial government websites are: 
Table 1 Selected Provincial Governments 
No Website 
1 Sumut (North Sumatera) 
2 Riau 
3 Sumbar (West Sumatera) 
4 Sumsel (South Sumatera) 
5 Jambi 
6 DKI Jakarta 
7 Jabar (West Java) 
8 Jateng (Central Java) 
9 DI Yogyakarta 
10 Jatim (East Java) 
11 Kalteng (Central Kalimantan) 
12 Kaltim (East Kalimantan) 
13 Kalsel (South Kalimantan) 
14 Sulut (North Sulawesi) 
15 Sulsel (South Sulawesi) 
16 NTB (West Nusa Tenggara) 
17 NTT (East Nusa Tenggara) 
18 Bali 
(3) Phase 3: Synthesizing, aimed to summarize and to confirm findings, 
concluding results of analysis on visuals and information contents of sample 
websites  
3.2  Variables of analysis 
There are 2 (two) types of variables for analysis: variable of website visuals and 
variable of information contents. 
 Design Issues and Information Contents of the Provincial 107 
 
3.2.1 Variable of Website Visuals  
According to Patel [14], when referring to presented element of content on a 
website, one can look into the visual organizations of the presented website that 
are commonly in use. Following PatelÅes recommendation on home page 
analysis, this study applied quantitative description of content analysis on 5 
(five) variables of website visuals: layout, user aids & services, texts, links, and 
image visualizations (details explanations of applied variables are presented in 
the table below). 
Table 2 Examined Variables for Website Visuals and their purposes 
Variabel Examination Purpose 
Layout To identify whether a site is designed using Grid or No Grid, and 
to determine whether the presented screen is made Liquid 
(Flexible) or Frozen (Fixed) 
Texts To identify the average words in a page (Differences of  % 
between linkage and non-linkage words) 
Links To identify total number of active linkages, types & methods of 
linking, and the average number of linkages per page. 
Image 
Visualization 
To identify type & method of page visualizations (dynamic or 
static, etc.), and the average number of image use per page 
User Aids & 
Services 
To identify standard usage of features that aid users and provide 
services: update, search option, help/assistance, Q&A or FAQ, 
Personalized / Member Login, Language Option, ID Web 
Administrator 
3.2.2 Variable of Information Contents 
Based on BerelsonÅes definition on content analysis [13], information contents of 
the websites were also examined according its accessibilities (the availability 
and understandability of the presented information contents) and deliverances 
(types and function of the presented information contents). Details explanations 
of examined variables are presented below: 
Table 3 Examined Variables for Information Contents and their purposes 
Variable Examination Purpose 
Availability To identify whether or not a website provide available and easy 
access to the presented information on their pages 
Understandability To identify whether or not a website provide easy to understand 
information on: a. Geography and/or Location; b. Cultural and 
tourism; c. Natural resources 
Deliverance To identify whether or not a website presented its information 
contents to serve as: a. Promotion; b. Information and/or 
Announcement; c. Documentaries 
 
108 Achmad Syarief, et al. 
3.3 Measurement Procedures 
3.3.1 Analysis on Website Visuals 
Each website was quantitatively compared according to the assigned 
examination variable of layout, texts, links, image visualization, and user-aid & 
services. Results are given in numbers (showing average, mean values, and/or 
percentages) as directly measured on examined variables of the presented 
website visuals. 
3.3.2 Analysis on Information  
Contents Information contents on each website was identified through online-
browsing. Browsing activities were conducted 2 (two) times using ADSL 
internet access. Results are given in numbers, showing average scores and/or 
values of those 2 (two) browsing activities on examined variables of the 
presented information contents. The examination process on information 
contents was based on interpretative procedures according to the following: 
1. If the information contents are fully presented, it will be assigned a value of 
Å\4? (four),  
2. If the information contents are adequately presented, it will be assigned a 
value of Å\2? (two), 
3. If the information contents are not presented and/or unavailable, it will be 
assigned a value of Å\0? (zero). 
Contents that could not be accessed, under construction, and/or contained error-
messages are directly associated as not presented and/or unavailable, thus it is 
assigned a value of Å\0? (zero). 
3.4 Sample of Stimuli 
As each website stimulus contains multiple pages and, thus, may hinders web-
page examination process; only 3 (three) pages per website are identified and 
examined further. Sample of website stimuli are presented on Figure 1. 
 Design Issues and Information Contents of the Provincial 109 
 
 
Figure 1 Sample of stimulus (Jabar). 
4 Results and Discussions 
4.1 Results on Website Visuals 
Examination results indicate that all sample websites (100%) use frozen-screen, 
in which changes of screen sizes (for example from 14? to 21? monitor display) 
do not result in the changes of page-appearance sizes. As consequences, users of 
small-size display monitor must adjust their ?readingsÅe due to the scrolling of 
web pages. It indicates that the provincial government websites of Indonesia 
still do not have users of small-size displays (such as those using notebooks, 
smart cell-phones, and/or PDAs) as their targeted viewers. Further, examination 
on variable of user aids& services features shows that in average provincial 
government websites of Indonesia apply 4-5 features of user aids & services. 
The most typical user aid & service features are Q&A or FAQ, Search, Update 
110 Achmad Syarief, et al. 
Information, and Help or Assistance. This indicates that, in average, provincial 
government websites of Indonesia have provided necessary features to assist 
visitors to their sites. It is worth to note that provincial government website of 
Riau is the most in applying user aids & service features (7 features), while 
websites of Sumut and NTB are the least in applying user-aids & service 
features (2 features). 
Examination on text-feature of websites indicate that most provincial 
government websites of Indonesia applied in average 709.7 words, which shows 
relatively higher density of information. Normal density of texts in a page is 
between 400-700 words to assure readibility of information. Thus, the presented 
numbers indicate that most provincial government websites of Indonesia may 
not provide optimal readings for users. Users may be blown-away by the hefty 
and hectic information on displays (some may reach to over 1200 words per 
page), which make them hard to understand. According to Nielsen (1997), 
website are typically do scanning than reading the texts thouroughly. Therefore, 
inability to provide simple and easy-to-read information on texts, as shown by 
most provincial government websites of Indonesia, may results in unwilling-
ness of users to interact further.  
Examination on the variable of web-linkages, indicate that?in average?
provincial government websites of Indonesia applied 96.72 linking features per 
page, mostly appear as text-linking type (79.5%) instead of imagelinking type 
(15.5%). The results are understandable, due to the fact that most provincial 
government websites of Indonesia leaning to serve as service-websites 
(informing activities and/or events) and not serving as commercial websites (for 
conducting  commercial activities on products and/or services). Yet, too much 
text-linking types require constant efforts in updating and/or managing the 
presented information contents of websites, which unfortunately did not 
thouroughly do by their website administrators. There were many cases in 
which the websites are not updated more than a year. Thus, the presented 
information are no longer credible and/or trustworthy to follow thorugh. 
Examination on image visualization features indicates that?in average?
provincial government websites of Indonesia applied 8.1 images, which consist 
of 20% animated images and 80% static images. This indicates that most 
provincial government websites of Indonesia do not familiar enough to use 
animated images, which may be used to attract web-visitors and/or place online 
advertisings. In fact, there are 3 (three) provincial government websites that did 
not apply animated images at all in their pages. According to Nielsen (1997), if 
carefully designed, animated images may be useful to attract web-visitors and to 
extend their interaction with the websites. Given that most institutional 
websites? provincial government included?are designed and created to attract 
 Design Issues and Information Contents of the Provincial 111 
 
visitors to specific information and services related to their places, it is worth to 
mention that using animated-images may assist them greatly to keep visitors. 
Examination on the pop-up feature indicates that most provincial government 
websites of Indonesia (89%, 16 samples) do not apply pop-up features in their 
pages. It is only 2 (two) websites: website of Jawa Barat (avg 0.3 pop-up 
feature) and Sulsel (avg 1.3 pop feature) that apply pop-up feature in their web-
pages. This may indicate that (1) The presented information on the page of 
provincial government websites of Indonesia are meant to be Å\just? information 
and not necessarily used as means to persuade users interests to the sites; (2) 
The provincial government of Indonesia do not familiar with the use of pop-up 
feature as immediate information agent that can be regularly changed and 
replaced.  
Composite results of the examination are presented in the following table: 
Table 4 Data of examined websites. 
Website LO/Gr 
User 
Aid 
Text Links  
Avg 
Img 
 
Anim 
 
Stat  
Fonts 
Avg  
Texts 
T-
link 
Img-
link 
Total 
BALI F/Grid 3 1 420.6 122 14 136 0.33 0 1 
NTT F/Grid 5 4 974 53 13 66 28.7 5.67 23 
NTB F/Grid 2 1 948 42 35 77 10 0 10 
DKI F/Grid 5 3 489.3 45 12 57 7.3 1.7 5.7 
JABAR F/Grid 3 1 1052.3 97 22 119 8 0.3 7.3 
JATENG F/Grid 5 2 553.7 101 33 134 6.7 2.7 4 
DIY F/Grid 6 2 835.3 155 14 169 16.7 9 7.7 
JATIM F/Grid 5 7 722.3 85 8 93 7.7 5.3 2.3 
SUMUT F/Grid 2 3 489.3 63 6 69 6.7 2.7 4 
SUMBAR F/Grid 6 1 856.3 110 6 116 1.8 0 6.3 
SUMSEL F/Grid 3 1 904 78 10 88 1.3 0.6 0.6 
JAMBI F/Grid 4 1 553 55 12 67 4.3 0.3 4 
RIAU F/Grid 7 1 1076.3 50 3 53 2.9 1.3 1.6 
KALTIM F/Grid 3 2 278 98 7 105 2 1 1 
KALSEL F/Grid 6 1 530.6 114 21 165 5.6 2 3.6 
KALTEN
G 
F/Grid 5 3 1285.3 51 24 75 11.3 0.7 10.7 
SULUT F/Grid 6 3 377 85 22 107 11.3 2.3 9 
SULSEL F/Grid 6 2 429.3 27 18 45 9.3 1.7 7.7 
 
112 Achmad Syarief, et al. 
4.2 Results on Information Contents 
Examination results (see Table 5) indicate that most of provincial government 
websites of Indonesia apply informational contents (value of 44, index score 
2.444) rather than documentation contents (value of 36, index score 2.000) and 
promotional contents (value of 12, index score 0.667). The results confirms 
previous contention that provincial government websites of Indonesia are 
designed and meant to provide information for visitors (see previous page, 
section 4.1). 
Table 5 Index Scores of Sample Websites. 
Index Website 
1.00 ? 0.75 
(Good) 
Jawa Barat (0.9375) 
Kalimantan Timur (0.75) 
DKI Jakarta (0.75) 
0.749 ? 0.50 
(Average) 
Sumatera Barat (0.6875) 
Jawa Tengah (0.625) 
Bali (0.5625) 
NTB (0.5625) 
NTT (0.5625) 
Sumatera Selatan (0.5625) 
Kalimantan Selatan (0.500) 
0.499 ? 0.25 
(Fair) 
Jambi (0.375) 
Riau (0.250) 
<0.249 
(Poor) 
DI Yogya, Jawa Timur, 
Sumatera Utara, Kalimantan 
Tengah, Sulawesi Utara, 
Sulawesi Selatan 
Further, there are 6 (six) websites: DI Yogya, Jawa Timur, Sumatera Utara, 
Kalimantan Tengah, Sulawesi Utara, and Sulawesi Selatan, which cannot fully 
be accessed within 2 (two) browsing occasions. Thus, those websites are given 
score of Å\0? indicating unavailability to provide data. Detail examination of 
sample websites shows that provincial government website of Jawa Barat is the 
most accessible and available sites (index score of 0.9375). 
5 Conclusions 
Based on the aforementioned analysis, it can be conclude that: 
1. Provincial government websites of Indonesia tend to present high-density of 
information compare to those of normal pages on displayed texts. This may 
result in non-optimal readability of presented contents. Users and/or readers 
may be unable to understand fully what the presented information is about. 
 Design Issues and Information Contents of the Provincial 113 
 
2. Thus, the provincial government websites of Indonesia may need to 
overcome these problems through simplifier and readable texts on their 
web-pages. 
3. Provincial government websites of Indonesia tend to concern more on using 
texts than images. As result, users and/or browsers may be hindered to 
interact further. It is worth to note that Å\explain-ability? of texts is limited 
due to their inability to be explored and described. Thus, provincial 
government websites of Indonesia may need to overcome these problems by 
functioning images as means of providing information. 
4. Provincial government websites of Indonesia tend to present descriptive-
information contents than those of documentary and promotional-contents. 
The presented information goes on one-way with no room for 
users/browsers to interact and/or to explore. It is worth to note that website 
is capable of presenting simultaneous graphics and text page information 
within a single click of mouse, providing a single interface for accessing all 
available internet protocols (such as e-mail, telnet, file transfer protocol or 
ftp, and hypertext transfer protocol or http). Therefore, the important thing 
from the web is not how it functions for displaying information, but how it 
presents distinct characters as a communication medium and creates way of 
impacting people. This, unfortunately, is not fully represented well in the 
provincial government websites of Indonesia.  
This study has successfully examined visual appearance and information 
contents of sample provincial government websites of Indonesia, suggesting 
results and insights for improving their optimal uses. However, there still room 
to explore further, in which this study may not included yet. Future study may 
include additional factors and/or variables for analysis, providing more 
complete results for the optimal use of provincial government websites of 
Indonesia. Those additional variables can be condition of interaction (pre and 
post browsing), number of samples, state of text-legibility, contextual theme of 
the presented information on the web-pages, users' and/or perceptual evaluation 
(understandability, learn-ability, ease of use, ease of navigate) on the presented 
Information contents. 
Acknowledgement 
This research was partially funded by Program Insentif Ristek ? Riset Dasar 
Bidang Informasi Teknologi 2008 (Ministry of Research and Technology, 
Republic of Indonesia). The authors wish to thank research assistants of Visual 
Communication Design Program for continuously making possible the process 
of compilation and analysis of data for the study. 
 
114 Achmad Syarief, et al. 
References 
[1] Fogg, B.J. 2003. Persuasive Technology: Using Computer to Change 
What We Think and Do, SF, USA: Morgan-Kauffmann. 
[2] Soo, Yong Rieh. 2002. Judgment of Information Quality and Cognitive 
Authority in the Web, Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology, 53(2), pp. 145-161 
[3] Syarief, Achmad. 2006. The Persuasiveness of Website Appearance: 
Eliciting Subjective Judgment to determine the Persuasive Appeal of 
Commercial Websites. Doctoral Dissertation: Laboratory of Design 
Psychology, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Chiba 
University. Japan 
[4] Fogg, B.J. 2003. Prominence-Interpretation Theory: Explaining how 
people assess credibility online, Proceeding of the CHI 2003: New 
Horizons. N, USA: ACM Press. 
[5] Mahlke, Sascha. 2002. Factors Influencing the Experience of Website 
Usage, Proceeding of the CHI 2002, Changing the world, changing 
ourselves.  
[6] Kim Moon. 1998. 
[7] Lee.1998. 
[8] Schenkman, B., & Jonsson, F. 2000. Aesthetics and Preferences of Web 
Pages, Behavior and Information Technology, 19(5), pp. 367-377. 
[9] Jakob Nielsen. 1990. 
[10] Ito Nakakoji. 1996. 
[11] Fernandes. 1995. 
[12] Sukaviriya ? Moran. 1990. 
[13] Berelson, Bernard. 1952. Content Analysis for Communication Research, 
NY, USA: MacMillan Publishing.  
[14] Patel.2003. 
 
 
