  
ITB J. Vis. Art & Des., Vol. 3, No. 2, 2009, 137-144                      137 
 
Form and Function of Carrying Tools in Traditional and 
Contemporary Culture 
Hendriana Werdhaningsih 
Design Department, Paramadina University 
 
 
Abstract. The Javanese Traditional Carrying Tools are categorized into two 
kinds based used of materials: anyaman made of woven bamboo or rattan and 
the other was made of cloth. The Traditional Javanese Carrying Tools that were 
made of bamboo/ rattan is actually a kind of container with different shapes. The 
types of goods that were brought was related to the shapes of the containers, 
demonstrate the type of interactions between the carrier and the goods. The 
Traditional Carrying Tools made of cloth have the flexibility in terms of being 
the containers of the carried goods. Selendang is used to carry goods, including 
the bamboo/ rattan containers and to carry babies. It can be used rumpled and 
straightened depends on the technical needs of carrying tools preferred by the 
user. In contemporary culture, the form and design of carrying tools more less 
construct by fashion and trends besides those practical used. Some product are 
being 'classic', some other are being 'fad'. Both products, traditional and 
contemporary have their own style, uniqueness, and own context. Analyzing 
both in design point of view is important as evaluation process, to finding new 
problems that will be starting point to create new products. Indonesia is well 
known for its abundant richness in traditions, which include the culture, the art, 
and the traditional products. Such treasure of traditions can inspire the 
development and invention of various kinds of artwork and current products. 
Keywords: Carrying tools; contemporary; culture; fashion; traditional. 
1 Introduction  
Carrying tool is a handling device, to carry things of, were it is used by people 
for traveling purpose. Carrying tool is everyday thing product that supports 
people?s activities and it has unique feature that is physically closed to the user 
in order to handling as well as close attachment to the human body. There-fore 
its function and form have close relation to the user?s activities, and furthermore 
their social culture. Due to its unique characteristic of carrying tools that relate 
to its particular culture, thus this article would like to discuss the both culture in 
seeing this particular product from its form and function. This article will 
discuss general view of carrying tools in contemporary world and either way, 
Javanese culture was taken as an example of discussing the traditional one. 
138 Hendriana Werdhaningsih 
2 Carrying Tools in Contemporary Culture 
In contemporary life, carrying tools products are mostly consist of bag, 
including handbag, mailbag, strap, backpack, suitcase, trunk, valise, wallet, bill-
fold, purse, and pouch, and cart, such as wagon, dray, wheelbarrow, trolleys and 
handcart. All these variant of carrying tools are similar throughout the world, as 
they are part of global culture of man made products.  
In addition, the functions of carrying tools were mostly expressed by their 
volume. Wallet and bill fold are tiny folded pouch which have enough space, 
only to carry money and cards. Purse and pouch, have bigger room to place and 
carry money, cards and sometimes cell phone. Handbag and portmanteau are 
bigger enough to place and carry more money, cards, cell phone, simple 
cosmetics and comb. Other bags such as mailbag, strap bag, back-pack, 
suitcase, varies in volume depend on its distinct purpose, they can carry more 
things as much as 50 liters, and trunk can even carries more than 50 liters.  
In general, bags have closed form, made by different kinds of material such as 
leather, fabric, artificial leather, plastics and metals. Many bags were made of 
more than one material. Different materials were used for outside and inside 
lining, for body and handle or strap, as well as uses of different materials to 
consider aesthetical purpose. The use of material depends on material 
characteristic such as durability of weight, water resistance, and flexibility, 
aesthetic appearance and so on.      
Cart as functional product were formed to support people for easy transporting 
goods, especially for difficult product to carry by hand. Cart design was 
developed in term of function, technology and material invention. General cart 
was divided into two categories, with and without human power. Furthermore, 
the invention of technology replaced animal power such horses with machine 
power. In order to carrying tools in distance, propelled cart was used to carry 
longer distance, while human power cart was used to carry shorter trip. In term 
of function, some carts were designed as multipurpose device, some others for 
special utilities, for example, cart or trolley that was designed for supermarket, 
for suitcases and trunks in airport, for hospital devices, etc. Cart with 
multipurpose usability usually have simple and open form, so that those have 
flexibility to carry kinds of shapes. Cart for special purpose usually have special 
form, which fits with kinds carries. Cart, excluded cars, uninfluenced by 
fashion, but developed more for practical function.   
 
 Form and Function of Carrying Tools in Traditional 139 
 
Bags in contemporary culture not solely employed as carrying device. On the 
other hand, bags were also part of fashion and lifestyle product. Bags designs 
were influenced by style and lifestyle of specific society. As Caroline Cox 
mention in her books Bags that the handbags is truly modern phenomenon: A 
bewitching accessory that has ability to shift its shape every nuance of fashion. 
In contemporary life, kinds of style and lifestyle exist. Bags also exist to support 
needs of each. Some bags design become classic and some other fads [1]. 
In Western culture, bags for woman were emerged from the needs of carrying 
things since women were liberated from just domestic matters and become have 
more freedom to choose their live. Therefore, they need tools to carry their 
necessities and many other things. Since its merge, bags are very close with 
fashion. Room inside bags have to able to accommodate all things they carries; 
fragile cosmetics and perfume bottle, sharp side keys, busy cell phone, many 
coins, money and bills. Outside bags have to represent the appearance the user?s 
preferences. Shape, color and material should be match with out-fits, occasions, 
and each personality, besides its utilities to carry things. In extreme bags for 
some women, become must-have product, for not only the elite but also the 
ordinary women. As Stuart Vevers , the British Fashion Council's Accessory 
Designer of the Year 2006 winner, comments: ÅgA few years ago, designer or 
luxury goods were only for elite, but now I get on the bus in Hackney and see 
ladies with genuine Mulberry bags that I know cost 600frÅh.  
Five years ago, people were used to have high-street out-fits and high-street 
bags; now they only have high-street outfit but the others are designer bags and 
shoes. The industry now is huge, and there is no turning back, once people have 
getting used to with the quality, they will stick with it for long period of time. In 
contemporary culture, designers in any layers create bags as unique as can be, 
placed bags as consumer goods that may attract people to buy it. Some 
designers sell their brand; some designers sell innovations in durability, some 
designers sell other values. 
Bag design was influenced by arts, social and cultural movements. Tiny wrist 
bag influenced by cubism, streamline shape of the clutch bag reflected the 
modernity of art deco, bag also adopt surrealism ideas. Strap bag and backpack 
come from military utilities to variant of nonmilitary bags in contemporary 
culture. Hippie movement rose or brought up tote bags, which also common 
nowadays. Millions variant from those kinds of bags can find in contemporary 
life. The used of bags depends on occasions, place to go, things to carry, and 
users personality. A 'bohemian-eco minded' style people goes to the market with 
one big full color tote made by woven textile which can carry all his/her things. 
They goes to party carries small pouch, with the similar woven textile. An ?out-
door? style people carry backpack everywhere. A 'military' style people every 
140 Hendriana Werdhaningsih 
variant of military bags in different occasions. A ?scholar? style people carry big 
laptop bags. In addition, an 'In Style' people use designer bags, original or fake 
one, everywhere they go. Bags become part of self-expression, or self-
statement. Bags in fashion formed for the sake of their looks, sometimes 
unconnected to what carry in-side. 
3 Traditional Carrying Tools: Case of Javanese Carrying Tools 
Nowadays, in Central Java, Jogjakarta and Surakarta traditional carrying tools 
are still being used for daily activities. For example, people use them to go to 
the markets, in rural area or even on the intercity road. Traditional way of 
carrying is common sight in the region. It is part of a distribution pattern during 
the past time in Java, i.e.: gulungan / mapadati (carriages pulled by animals as 
means of transportation), tandu (specifically used to carry people, lifted by 
some people and then rested on their shoulders), atitih (carrying tools placed on 
horses? backs), pikulan and gendhong (carrying tools using a long cloth hanged 
on a person?s back) (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1 Distribution patterns during the past time in Java. 
The pictures were also shown of traditional distribution patterns from the lower 
class in Javanese culture. Similar with other traditional civilization, traditional 
Javanese people is divided into two classifications; wong gedhe (the high-class) 
and wong cilik (the lower-class). Wong gedhe people did not carry things; wong 
cilik did that for them. Wong cilik carried wong gedhe with tandu. Wong cilik 
who was working for wong gedhe carried wong gedheÅfs baby. 
Wong gedhe and wong cilik are not really mentioned nowadays. Traditional 
carrying tools can be used by everyone from any social class. Due to the 
 Form and Function of Carrying Tools in Traditional 141 
 
emerging of new technology, traditional carrying tools were transformed to 
different mode. Tandu and atatih, were no longer used, and madapati and 
pikulan are now rare. Atatih was transformed into kronjot which was replaced 
by bicycle and motorcycle, and tandu was replaced by cars. 
The traditional Javanese carrying tool was categorized into two kind based of 
materials: the first one was anyaman (woven) made of bamboo/ rattan and the 
other one was made of cloth. The bamboo/ rattan is categorized into carried 
without any other tools, carried with the use of cloth, carried with the use of a 
long stick rested on (a) shoulder(s), and carried by a two-wheeled vehicle . 
Traditional carrying tools made of cloth consist of selendang (pashmina- like 
cloth) and ules. The traditional carrying tools made of cloth have the flexibility 
in terms of being containers of the carried goods. Selendang uses to carry 
goods, including the bamboo/ rattan containers and to carry babies. It can be 
used rumpled and straightened depends on the technical needs of carrying tools 
preferred by the user. Selendang for carrying things is lurik. Batik with floral 
pattern used for carrying babies. Lurik has more durability than batik. Batik has 
softer texture and their floral pattern symbolized fertility. 
The Javanese traditional bamboo/rattan carrying tools is kind of container with 
different shapes. The bamboo/ rattan containers are categorized based on their 
shapes into: wide-opened, opened, semi-closed, and closed. There are some 
relations between the shape and the type of carried goods. The wide-opened 
containers such as tambir and tampah, with tight anyaman were used to handle 
foods and to dis-play ready-to-eat foods. Opened-containers with loose 
anyaman, bronjong, were used to carry vegetables. The opened-containers, with 
tight anyaman, tenggok and kronjot, were used to carry any kinds of goods. The 
semi-closed containers with tight anyaman, tenggok with tambir, were used to 
serve foods and some ingredients. The closed-containers with tight or loose 
anyaman, tenong, kepis, kisan and variants of kronjot, were used to carry only 
one type of goods: fresh traditional snacks, live fish, or live chicken. The types 
of goods were related to the shapes of the containers, also the type of 
interactions between the carrier and the goods, both operational functions and 
the views towards the abstract values of the carried goods.  
Similar with bags in Western culture in the past, there was also a differentiation 
in the traditional Javanese carrying tools that is based on gender/ sex of user. It 
is the biological of human anatomy, in which the different between shapes of 
male and female body parts. Males? shoulders tend to be wider and flatter that is 
suitable to shoulder carry, while females? shoulders tend to have narrower 
dropping curve that is less likely suitable to hold shoulder carry. The females 
hips are wider than males that made the activity of menggendhong (Javanese 
way of carrying called gendhong) is likely suitable for females than males.  
142 Hendriana Werdhaningsih 
In addition, the traditional Javanese culture distinguishes males and females 
duty based on their social responsibility. The males are responsible of the duties 
in the social surrounding environment while females are responsible in the 
domestic areas. This made the carrying products to be different. Gendhongan is 
typical female carrying tools (Figure 2), and pikulan is typical male carrying 
tools (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 2 Gendhongan is typical female carrying tools. 
 
Figure 3 Pikulan is typical male carrying tools. 
In bereavement duties for example, women was assigned for one gendhongan 
and male for one pikulan. Up until now, it is very uncommon for male to carry 
things with gendhongan, or female to carry things with pikulan. The unisex 
traditional carrying tool is kronjot, which can be employed by anyone who can 
ride a bike or motorcycle. Male nowadays prefer to use kronjot than pikulan. 
Women are still using gendongan as carrying tools. Selendang as tools for 
nggendhong (carrying), are similar to bags for women in Western culture. 
Selendang is more likely very close to women, as extension part of her body. 
Selendang is always lying on her shoulder as empty bag, ready to use for 
carrying things (Figure 4). Some women used an end of selendang to wrap her 
money in (Figure 5). Sometimes selendang used to protect her head from sun 
ray, wind or shower rain (Figure 6). 
 Form and Function of Carrying Tools in Traditional 143 
 
 
Figure 4 Women with selendang on her shoulder, a painting from Frans Lebret, 
1863. 
 
Figure 5 End of selendang to wrap money. 
 
Figure 6 Selendang used for sun, rain and wind protection. 
4 Traditional Idea in Contemporary Life 
Both carrying products in traditional and contemporary cultures have their own 
style, uniqueness, and own context. Analyzing both in design point of view is 
important as evaluation process, to finding new problems that will be used as 
starting point to create new products. 
144 Hendriana Werdhaningsih 
As happened in the development of baby carriers design. In the Western society, 
on-the-body baby carrying just started to known in the 60?s with the advent of 
the structured soft pack. In the early 70?s, in Germany, the wrap was 
reintroduced. In 1986, the ring sling was invented and well populated. On-the-
body baby carrying established in many cultures, including Javanese wong cilik 
people, for centuries. Chinese mei tai, which has been around for centuries, is 
become popular in mid-2003 after being modernized with padding and other 
adjustments.            
Indonesia is well known for its abundant richness in traditions, which include 
culture, art, and traditional products. Such treasure of traditions may inspire the 
development and invention of various kinds of art-work and current products. 
Moreover, the design development based on Indonesian traditions can be used 
as a powerful weapon in the vast competition of design in the world today. The 
thorough understanding of the principles of traditions is one of the most 
important things for a designer in order to utilize it as a source of inspiration. 
References 
[1] Cox, Caroline. 2007. Bags, Aurum Press Ltd. London. 
 
 
 
