  
ITB J. Vis. Art & Des., Vol. 3, No. 2, 2009, 167-174                      167 
 
Sadum: Traditional and Contemporary 
Ratna Panggabean  
 Crafts and Traditions Research Group, Faculty of Art and Design,  
Bandung Institute of Technology 
 
 
Abstract. Sadum is one of the traditional cloths of the Batak people in North 
Sumatra. It is woven on a back strap loom with supplementary weft technique. 
Sadum is a warp faced weaving made of cotton and beads woven into the cloth. 
Ritually it is used as a shoulder cloth, gifts exchanges, and in dances. It also 
bears the symbol of good tidings and blessings for the receiver. The cloth has 
change during times in technique, color, patterns, as well as in functions. But the 
use as a ritual cloth stays the same. The basic weaving techniques and 
equipments used to create it hasnÅft change, but its material and added techniques 
has made this cloth become more rich in color, pattern, and texture. Most 
changes began when the Europeans came to Indonesia and introduced new 
material such as synthetic fibers and colors. In the 70s traditional cloth of 
Indonesia got its boost when the government declared batik as Indonesian 
national attire. This encourages other traditional weavings to develop into 
contemporary clothing. Later, new techniques and material were introduced to 
the Sadum weavings including embroidery, silk and golden threads which were 
never used before. 
Keywords: sadum; traditional; ulos; weaving. 
 
Batak traditional weaving is called ulos, which literally means blanket. Ulos is a 
woven fabric, commonly 50 to 150 cm in width and 150 to 220 cm in length 
and made of cotton fiber threads. Motif designing in ulos is achieved through 
several techniques, such as supplementary weft (songket), warp ikat, and 
application of beads. In the traditional life of Batak people, ulos plays 
inseparable significant roles, especially those related to tradition and local 
religion. There are actually several kinds of ulos with different traditional 
significances, such as Ragidup, Ragihotang, Sadum, Sibolang, Bintang Maratur, 
Mangiring [1]. Every ulos fabric possesses distinct ornaments which 
differentiate one from another. Among various types of ulos having traditional 
significances, sadum is the most common. Sadum is distinguishable from other 
types of ulos due to its bright colors.  Like other types of ulos, Sadum features 
also warp-faced background, except for the portion of the motif formed using 
songket (supplementary weft) technique. Sadum also features more color 
variations than other types of ulos. This traditional fabric is worn by both men 
168 Ratna Panggabean 
and women, in both delightful and mournful occasions. This general 
characteristic renders the traditional fabric open to developments. 
 
Figure 1 Sadum Tarutung. Cotton. Late 19th century (Collection of Dr. Poltak 
Hutagalung). 
 
Figure 2 Backstrap loom (Anas, 1995). 
Sadum is produced in Tarutung, North Sumatera, as a type of publicly 
consumed ulos. This traditional fabric is sold in local markets, major cities, and 
tourism souvenir centers. Sadum is commonly 55 ? 120 in width and 150 ? 200 
cm in length, and traditionally woven by women using the backstrap loom. This 
loom can only produce a limited width of fabric. To produce a sheet of fabric 
 Sadum: Traditional And Contemporary 169 
 
wider than 100 cm, the weaving process involves two long sheets of fabric with 
a symmetrical motif which are later combined into a unified sheet. The motifs 
on the sheet are applied through structure design, which means that the motifs 
are created simultaneously along with the weaving process. The techniques used 
are songket (supplementary weft) and application of beads in the weaving. The 
remainder of the warp thread at the edge of the sheet is knit horizontally as the 
seal of the weaving, while the remaining thread is spun to shape tassels. 
Weaving the sheets using the back strap loom allows for denser and more solid 
thread structures and plaits, which in turn produces soft, fine, and heavy sheets. 
Sadum, among other traditional Batak fabrics, has the richest color variation. 
Besides the traditional red, white, and black, sadum also features bright colors, 
such as blue, yellow, and green. These colors are obtained from indigenous 
plants, such as mengkudu/awl tree (morinda citrifolia) which produces red, 
indigo (indigofera tinctoria) produces blue, and turmeric (curcuma domestica) 
which produces yellow [2]. Sadum ornaments basically consist of three main 
lines on the arrangements of warp threads, which are usually dark red and blue. 
The motifs are latter woven using the supplementary weft technique (songket) 
following the direction of the weft, usually in yellow and green. One of the 
most distinctive motifs in Sadum is the horizontal line which was entirely 
woven using the weft threads in bright colors. The motif on this line is 
commonly diamond-shaped. Other motifs are stylization of natural objects 
arranged on horizontal lines above the diamond-shaped motif. 
 
Figure 3 One of the distinctive motif of Sadum, a horizontal line with diamond 
shaped patterns woven in bright colors. (Collection of Dr. Poltak Hutagalung). 
 
170 Ratna Panggabean 
According to Batak culture, Sadum represents joy and blessing and appears in 
almost every ritual of both delight (marriage, birth) and grief (death). It is not 
uncommon that words of hope and blessing are woven on sadum. As traditional 
clothing, sadum is commonly worn as a shoulder cloth for man or woman. In 
traditional dances, sadum is also worn as body covering (sarong), breast 
covering, and headwear for women [3]. In rituals, sadum is presented as a 
symbol of blessing for the receiver and is common in gift exchange rituals. 
Sadum is also utilized as traditional equipment, usually as a coaster or cover of 
other traditional artifacts. The appearance of sadum, which is rich in colors and 
beads, contains a positive traditional meaning which attracts the general public. 
As message bearer and gift, this traditional fabric may be presented to anyone, 
including those outside the Batak society. Thus, sadum may be produced, with 
certain adjustment and diversification in its forms and functions, to anticipate a 
larger market.  For this reason, sadum is produced in different degrees of 
quality, according to its role in rituals. For instance, the quality of sadum for 
rituals is not as high as sadum for clothing, message bearer, and gift. The 
consideration of the quality of sadum as a traditional fabric covers motif 
sophistication, variation of colors, and density of weaving. 
 
Figure 4 Parents of the groom cover the shoulders of the bride & bridegroom 
with a Sadum as token blessings. (Courtesy of S.E. Hutapea). 
Since the arrival of Western civilization in the early 19th century for 
disseminating Christianity and, later, colonization, the production of sadum also 
underwent development in techniques, materials, and background motifs. In the 
past, every Batak women could weave. However, since the introduction of 
Western education, plantation, and economy systems, weaving became an 
 Sadum: Traditional And Contemporary 171 
 
activity centered in certain regions. The best weaving centers of the era were 
those in fertile regions, such as the Silindung valley, around Lake Toba, and 
South Tapanuli. These weaving centers specialized in certain traditional fabrics 
[4]. The Europeans, at that time, had also introduced factory-made fine cotton 
threads in bright colors, the result synthetic dyes. The changes escalated in 1930 
when the pedal loom
1
   is introduced to the people of Toba [4]. Ulos weaving 
also utilized this device and new techniques which, in turn, influence the 
produced forms and motifs. The most evident change was apparent in the sparse 
density of the threads and in the background which showed both the warp and 
weft threads on the basic weaving. This resulted in thinner and lighter fabrics. 
Besides the quality of the fabrics, the creation of motifs became simpler due to 
the technical limitation of the pedal loom. This limitation made it impossible for 
sadum to be produced using this loom. Even so, the weaving of sadum 
underwent development in materials and motifs, namely in the usage of factory-
made threads and synthetic colors which offer more variations than traditional 
colors. European flower motifs, such as the rose, also began to adorn sadum 
ornaments, as well as new colors for the background which, until then, had 
previously been limited only into black and white. 
 
Figure 5 Sadum influenced by Europe patterns and colors. Cotton. Late 19th 
century. (Collection of Dr. Poltak Hutagalung). 
The development of sadum reaches its peak after the 1970s. At that time, the 
Indonesian government enacted the role of batik shirt as an alternative to formal 
clothing, besides suit and tie. This enactment marked the revival of Indonesian 
traditional fabrics. Traditional fabrics diversified not only into various kinds of 
                                               
1 The pedal loom is a loom that uses a foot pedal to create spaces between the warp threads to 
enable the weft threads to pass through. The pedal loom is a predecessor of the non-mechanical 
loom. 
172 Ratna Panggabean 
new clothing, but also into new functions. The usage of traditional clothing 
developed into the production of traditional fabrics as materials for modern 
clothing, such as suit, skirts, and other clothing accessories, besides scarf. The 
wearers and enthusiasts of sadum are not only the Batak society but also the 
general public. As a result of adjustment to market demands, sadum has become 
open to development and changes. Sadum then falls into two groups, with the 
first being the traditional fabrics serving ritual purposes and adorned with 
traditional ornaments, while the other being the general traditional clothing 
adjusted to meet the demands of the market. This development was 
consequently followed by the development of materials and techniques. Along 
with the development of textile industry in Indonesia at that time, the motifs of 
sadum have become ornaments printed on organdy fabrics and mass-produced. 
The usage of factory-made fabrics was solely intended for the production of 
modern clothing, and not the production of traditional fabrics. The production 
of traditional sadum has since been going on to serve ritual purposes still 
conducted by Batak people up to now. 
   
Figure 6 (left): Sadum as a sarong & shoulder cloth woven in matching pattern 
and color. (right): Various ulos sold in MedanÅfs market. 
The development of functions happened also in the 1980s when traditional 
fabrics transformed into national clothings for women, such as in the form of 
sarong and kebaya or kurung blouses with scarves similar to the sarong. Sadum 
and other types of ulos were then modified into a suit called mandar. In the 
1990s, sadum as mandar saw better development, both in colors and motifs. 
Entering the 21st century, the production of sadum has undergone so many 
techniques that it even incorporates techniques previously unfamiliar with 
sadum, such as bordir (embroidery) and krancang . The interest of the market in 
contemporary style of traditional clothing is growing. Sadum now features new 
 Sadum: Traditional And Contemporary 173 
 
color compositions. The main motif patterns as the identity of the traditional 
sadum are still exists, but the composition of colors has been suited to meet 
current market demands. The materials and techniques are affected as well. Silk 
has become one of the preferred fibers for the production of sadum mandar. Silk 
fibers which form threads in small sizes require proficient skills in weaving. 
 
Figure 7 Sadum woven with synthetic threads in gold, red, and brown colors 
with beads interwoven into its weavings. Also applying embroidery at each 
weaving ends 
 
Figure 8 Sadum with embroidery in its edges as a finishing touch. Cotton, 
synthetic yarn, beads. 2008. 
174 Ratna Panggabean 
The new technique added to the weaving of sadum is embroidery. Traditionally, 
embroidery has never been applied to the production of sadum and other types 
of ulos. Nevertheless, the rising market demands in embroidered fabrics result 
in the incorporation of the technique into the woven sadum. The smoothness of 
weaving using small-sized threads is complemented by embroidered patterns 
using similar threads. This development of sadum for contemporary purposes 
has affected the weaving process of the traditional sadum as well. New color 
compositions are applied, especially to motif lines. Embroidery techniques are 
also applied. This new, highly-skilled process will, in turn, affect the economic 
value of sadum. This, however, does not diminish the interest of both the 
producers and consumers in sadum, considering that the produced fabrics 
possess high quality. 
         
Figure 9  Sarong & shoulder cloth with Sadum motifs in contemporary colors 
composition. Silk, cotton. 2008. (Courtesy of Arthur Sianipar). 
Reference 
[1] Hasibuan, Dr. Jamaluddin S., Batak, Art and Culture, Medan, 1986 
[2] Anas, Biranul (et.al), Tenunan Indonesia, Yayasan Harapan Kita, Jakarta, 
1995 
[3] Niessen, S.A., Batak Cloth and Clothing: A Dinamic Indonesian 
Tradition, Oxford Unversity Press, Kuala Lumpur, 1993 
[4] Sibeth, Achim, Living With Ancestors: The Batak, Peoples of the Island 
of Sumatra, Thames & Hudson, London, 1991 
 
