  
ITB J. Vis. Art & Des., Vol. 3, No. 2, 2009, 187-196                      187 
 
Visual Pollution in the Context of Conflicting Design 
Requirements 
Sumartono 
Design Department, Indonesia Institute of the Arts (ISI) at Yogyakarta  
 
 
Abstract. All designs (graphic, product, and interior designs) are directed to 
consider certain requirements which are followed by logical thinking to fulfill a 
design process. Once the requirements of each design have been well-considered 
and the logical design process has been fulfilled, the design is complete. Ideally, 
all designs are not supposed to be in conflict with each other because each one is 
based on a logical design process. In reality, however, the mutual existence of 
these designs has produced conflicting requirements and thereby conflicting 
logics. This conflict can be seen in visual pollution. This paper will examine the 
impact of visual pollution caused by billboards, street signs, posters, 
houses/buildings, automobiles, shopfront graphic designs, packaging designs, 
graffiti, etc. in the context of conflicting logics/requirements. Today, opposition 
grows everywhere against all visually polluting designs and outdoor advertising 
is the most prominent one. Some people think that it should be banned from the 
city. Some others, however, think that if advertisements are removed from the 
city, it will become a bland concrete jungle. Every city in Indonesia needs a 
clean-city law to control illegal advertisements and signs. It is possible to make 
legal yet attractive advertisements that will give positive contribution to Ågvisual 
democracyÅh in Indonesia. 
Keywords: design; visual pollution. 
1 Introduction  
Recently, there is a fast-growing awareness among people in many countries, 
including Indonesia, of the danger of visual pollution. Combined with other 
pollutions such as haze and illegally-built structures erected by poor people in 
Indonesia, which are not the concern of this paper, it constitutes a very serious 
threat to human life in this country. ?Visual pollution? is a term used broadly to 
cover limits on the ability to view distant objects, subjective issue of visual 
clutter, intruding structures on beautiful scenes, and other visual defacement. 
This term is used specifically in this paper to cover limits on the ability to view 
esthetic objects in full or in proper placement. Visual pollution is also the result 
of design out of context with the environment or already existing elements. This 
part of environmental pollution is an aesthetic issue consisting of signs which 
do not concern us, yet impinge on our eyes. These are among others billboards, 
188 Sumartono 
street signs, posters, houses/buildings, automobiles, shopfront graphic designs, 
packaging designs, graffiti, etc.  
Most of them have been designed based on design requirements followed by 
logical thinking. In everyday life or in commercial sense, they have to 
competing each other to attract people. This has encouraged designers and 
companies to make attracting billboards, street signs, posters, houses/ buildings, 
automobiles, shopfront graphic designs, packaging designs, graffiti, etc. in 
various sizes. Consequently, in many parts of human environment, especially in 
the cities in Indonesia, it is impossible to view esthetic objects in full or in 
proper placement. It is very important to note that even if they are based on 
logical thinking, their form, sizes, and placement often conflict each other. 
2 Inevitable Logical Conflicts among Designs 
It has to be pointed out at the outset that the meaning of every word or concept 
is never stable, so are the words ?requirement? and ?logic.? In this paper, it is 
enough to say that a requirement is a thing that is required. In design context, a 
good set of requirements must be fulfilled to satisfy the client. It is the 
obligation of the designer to capture client requirements. In design context, 
requirements can be divided into ?functional requirements? and non-functional 
requirements.? The first point to what a client wants a design to function. The 
latter points to restriction are a design will encounter. 
The term ?logic? came from the Greek word logos, which is interchangeably 
translated as word, sentence, reason, discourse, or rule. Due to the impossibility 
to grasp one stable meaning of this word, here logic is defined as the 
mechanism of correct reasoning principles. In design context, every designed 
artifact is based on design requirements followed by logical thinking. 
Unlike in more exact field such as civil engineering, correct reasoning 
principles in design represent only one aspect of logic, which is called by 
Sigfried Maser [1] as the logic of the head or ?rationality.? The other aspect of 
logic that also has to be considered in the process of designing is the logic of the 
heart or ?intuition.? This logic leads to the Ågobjective qualityÅh of products 
resulted from rationally calculated length, weight, depth, sizes, etc. The logic of 
the heart leads to the Ågsubjective qualityÅh of products resulted from carefully 
considered feelings, emotions, fantasies, etc. In order for a design to be 
successful, it must be able to transform these two logics into a dialogue that will 
lead to the logic of life and the logic of survival. It is important to remember 
that these two logics do not harmonize well. It is inevitable for a design process 
to keep this dialogue working although in popular sense people tend to consider 
a design solely the work of rationality or the logic of the head. 
 Visual Pollution in the Context of Conflicting Design  189 
 
Some design experts point out that every good design involves a design process 
consisting of certain stages. This process should take into account the design 
requirements (functional and non-functional/restrictive) that have been 
negotiated by client and designer. It will become clear that number of stages 
varies between one design and the other. Every design process is based on the 
dialogue between two logics mentioned in the previous paragraph.  The process 
is not easy as clear from the following simplified summary of the main stages in 
graphic, product, and interior design processes for comparison, quoted and 
slightly modified from David Rivett?s essay entitled ÅgProject ManagementÅh. In 
this context, not all projects involve all stages [2]. It will become clear that 
although these design processes are based on the dialogue between the two 
logics mentioned above, the conflict of logics is always unavoidable. Design 
process never offers an ultimate solution. A potentially large variety of design 
solutions is possible to fulfill the requirements of a design. Even according to 
Krippendorff it is justifiable to propose that design is making sense (of things) 
[3]. Buchanan points out that the design eludes reduction and remains a 
surprisingly flexible activity [4]. It is clear from this that the meaning of design 
is loose. Design is inevitably concerned with dilemma situations. 
 
Figure 1 The design process?a simplified summary of the main stages; after 
David Rivett. 
190 Sumartono 
The above list inform us that good designs must follow uneasy logical steps and 
they will conflict each other after functioning, no matter how logical each 
design seems to be or how extensive all kinds of representation formats 
(diagrams, sketches, drawings, layouts, etc.) have been made. The conflicting 
logics may not only involve the three design processes representing the three 
design fields but also involve stages inside each design field even without the 
intervention of the two others. That is why after functioning for some time there 
is another stage in every design called design review. It is obvious now how 
multidimensional the conflicting logics are.  In conclusion, each design process 
needs not only the logic of the head/rationality but also the logic of the 
heart/intuition. It is important to remember that requirements analysis can be a 
long and arduous process and even when the unclear, incomplete, ambiguous, or 
contradictory stated requirements have been resolved, there is no guarantee that 
a design is absolutely finished. 
3 Impacts on Design-Related Daily Life 
Conflicting logics in design have serious impacts on several sectors of design-
related daily life and more specifically in the context of this writing is visual 
pollution. A popular example is what happens in many major cities in Indonesia 
where some historical buildings cannot be viewed from all sides due to the 
presence of one or more big billboards blocking certain view to those buildings. 
The proliferation of billboards in many cities in Indonesia is spurred by the 
growth of automobile traffic. From the perspective of historicity and design, 
most architects or interior designers might be of the opinion that logically all 
views toward those historical buildings be protected from any blocking 
structure. The reason is that because historical buildings were made in the past 
following logical requirements to be viewed from all sides and it is very 
important to show them to the public in full and proper placement for cultural 
education purpose. However, the billboard designer might think differently; he 
or she might have used his or her own logic to locate the billboard at that 
position to be noticed easily by people. Although not following all design stages 
mentioned by Rivett above, many designers incorporate some of them when 
designing a billboard. He or she thinks that the selected stages are significantly 
represented a design and logic.  
Today big billboards, some featuring semi-naked models, dominate the views of 
many cities in Indonesia. As a matter of fact, these billboards may be 
considered as out of context with the environment. The designers who made 
them may be accused of failing to consider the relationship with existing 
components of the visual environment. In his logical context, however, there 
was no other choice except making big size billboards. Otherwise, people would 
not notice them easily and another company probably would take the 
 Visual Pollution in the Context of Conflicting Design  191 
 
opportunity and also made a big billboard, which would also use its own logic. 
Unfortunately, somehow today local governments seem to be careless. They 
may use their own logic not to ban them because advertisements pour a big sum 
of money to cities.  
It is ridiculous that a number of important figures in some local governments 
sometimes still talk in the newspapers about the optimism to make their cities 
beautiful. Ironically, big billboards featuring big-size photographs of prominent 
governmental and political figures are scattered around Indonesian cities today. 
In addition, big cigarette billboards have also been continuously erected in 
Indonesian cities, and even villages. Cigarette billboards are truly the king of 
outdoor advertising world in this country. The cigarette industry is a spectacular 
success story, so most prominent governmental and political figures prefer to be 
silent concerning with the serious danger of cigarette smoking.  
Recently there has been a deep concern on the blackening of rows of overpass 
footings in Jakarta due to weather pollution. Some urban experts suggest that 
utilizing the space for advertising could create a more esthetic cityscape and 
generate income for the city. Potential areas under Jakarta?s overpasses are 
among others Slipi, West Jakarta, and Pademangan, North Jakarta Viewed from 
design perspective; nothing goes wrong with this idea. Designing 
advertisements on rows of overpass footings could be made logical after 
considering a set of requirements.  But it sounds good because only functional 
requirements are concerned. From the perspective of non-functional 
requirements, however, the esthetic future seems to be unclear because not long 
after the completion of the advertisements, the overpass footings quite probably 
will be covered with flyers or posters.   
Street signs are also a contributing part to visual pollution in Indonesia. In many 
streets in big cities like Jakarta, Surabaya, Medan, Bandung, Makassar, 
Semarang, and Yogyakarta, there are abundant examples of polluting street 
signs. They accompany the pre-existing obligatory traffic signs which are also, 
due to the often improper placement, already polluting streets of those cities. 
Small announcement sheet signs or flyers are very often stuck on electricity and 
property poles or surfaces of any structure. Many of the stuck sheets are not 
taken off even when the announcement on it has expired. Unfortunately, they 
will be replaced by other flyers. During campaign period of Indonesian general 
election conducted one month ago, various political parties stuck many small 
signs on electricity and property posts all over town, but until now many of 
them have not been taken off. Now the general election is finished and no one is 
responsible for the removal of the expired campaign sheets. It is wrong to think 
that all these stick announcement sheets are not designed. Some of them were 
designed to fulfill certain design requirements based on certain logic. They were 
192 Sumartono 
designed to notice people walking or moving nearby, therefore their sizes and 
placement had already been considered. 
Street views in Indonesian big cities are also densely populated by posters in 
various dimensions which are stick illegally on the surfaces of many public 
buildings and facilities. It is common that posters like this stay on the surfaces 
for months so that finally the cities become dirty for a long time. It is possible 
even to find a certain political party poster put on the outer surface of a bridge 
five years ago still sticking safely today, albeit it is dirty. The main reason for 
sticking posters on the surfaces of many public buildings and facilities is 
because it is free of charge yet disseminate information effectively. Poster is a 
popular form of graphic design. Poster design also incorporate stages of a 
design process. It is created based on client?s set of requirements and logic. 
Here again we realize that the fulfillment of logical design requirements never 
takes into account the post-functioning of the posters. A large number of 
posters? pollutes views of Indonesian big cities everyday. It is impossible to 
clean them because posters come and go rapidly. Combined with street banners, 
they make those cities more visually polluted. . 
When buildings are being blocked by big billboards, architects complain. In 
visual pollution context, however, architecture is not innocent. Some luxurious 
buildings have been built in this country recently. The architects who designed 
them might have thought that they were in context with the environment 
because they were built based on a set of requirements followed by logical 
thinking. Poor people living near those buildings today, however, may think 
differently. The presence of these buildings may also mean for them the 
presence of visual pollution since they are feeling depressed living close to 
money-consuming buildings. What the architects think as in-context buildings 
are out-of-context ones for them. A good example is the Jatim Expo Building at 
Ahmad Yani Street, Surabaya. With total exhibition floor of 5120 m2 it has 
been classified as international in stature. A number of prestigious events have 
been organized here. In extreme contrast, however, small houses of poor people 
living close to this building tell a different story. In front of them usually the 
people dry clothes in the sun. This non-functional requirement was beyond the 
logic of the designer to handle. It was impossibility and it is logical, depending 
from what logical perspective he viewed. Interior design may also cause visual 
pollution. It can be seen obviously from the establishment of relatively new 
malls in many cities in Indonesia. Ambarrukmo Plaza, in Yogyakarta, is an 
example. True that this mall has boosted local economy and created jobs and 
entrepreneurial opportunities for people in the neighborhood, but visual 
pollution is unavoidable. The existence of this mall has caused the 
establishment of small shops which sell various things. As a result, traffic 
congestion is unavoidable and the area becomes very crowded. This mall sells 
 Visual Pollution in the Context of Conflicting Design  193 
 
luxurious products, while it occupies a location where many poor families live. 
Although it has boosted local economy and created jobs, in a sense it has 
nothing to do with the poor. While they live a poor life as usual, they have to 
keep in touch not only with luxurious products exhibited in the interior spaces 
of the mall but also with those exhibited in some quality stores recently built 
nearby. Conflicting logics are obvious here. The design of the mall was based 
on a logical design process, but the non-functional requirements in the form of 
environmental restrictions, especially poverty, are also logical. The point is that 
the environmental constraint has not been overcome. 
Good will on the part of a local government may also result in visual pollution. 
An interesting lesson can be learnt from a small apartment built by the city of 
Yogyakarta on the edge of Code River. Previously the apartment was built to 
provide poor people with a low-price apartment rooms for leasing. The set of 
requirements of this apartment included the ability of it to house tens of families 
live a normal life here. Occupants must have been expected to keep the 
environment clean. What we see today however is far from what has been 
expected. It is a daily sight that everyday most of the families hang wet clothes 
which are blocking good views. Although the apartment was previously 
intended to be built in context, today it tends to be out of context with the 
environment. The building becomes dirty and less attractive. Although this non-
functional requirement might have been considered in the design process, the 
real world tells a different story today.  
Automobiles have also been considered a factor in creating visual pollution. 
Automobile traffic has grown very rapidly in Indonesian big cities. Traffic in 
big cities like Jakarta, Surabaya, Medan, Bandung, and Makassar becomes very 
crowded. Here visual pollution in this sense is not the responsibility of car 
designers since traffic jam, as a non-functional requirement, is beyond the 
capability of a car designer. At least in designing a car he or she has to follow a 
design process stages more or less like those which have been listed above    
logically. It is just like the designing of Toyota Vios, as a replacement of the 
Toyota Soluna. The designer must have designed it as a true private car. But in 
Indonesia it has been used as taxicabs as well and is specially rebadged as the 
Toyota Limo. Beyond the previous anticipation of the designer, and it was not 
his or her responsibility, it has caused disappointment among buyers. For the 
Vios? owners the Limo is a kind of visual pollution as well. 
In Jakarta bus advertisements has boosted the income of bus company owners. 
However, bus advertisements have been accused of contributing a lot in shaping 
visual pollution in Jakarta. Bus designers are not responsible for the inclusion of 
advertisements on the interior and exterior of buses. There is no single logic 
could validly ban bus advertisements. The point is that not all advertisements 
194 Sumartono 
affixed to buses are well-designed and many well-designed advertisements are 
often dirty all time. Buses and bus advertisements also play a role in the making 
of visual clutter. Visual clutter can be defined as over crowdedness  in a certain 
place, especially in a big city, where there are found not only traffic jam but 
also the presence of big and small street signs, billboards of various sizes, 
franchise architecture housing a number of branded fast food, restaurants and 
stores, overhead stretches of utility wires, etc. Visual clutter will disorient 
people who happen to be at the location. An example of visual clutter in Jakarta 
is the area around Roxymas.  Visual clutter of this kind can be said to represent 
Åga big conflict of design logicsÅh because all kinds of design are involved in it. 
Visual clutter can be found easily in many Indonesian big cities. 
Packaging design is one of the most exciting areas of design today. Packaging 
design has the primary goal to attract customers? attention. For this purpose, 
package designs can not simply inform the customers, but also provoke feelings 
and communicate emotions. An effective packaging looks attractive and 
impresses many people with its creativity. Packaging design is part of a wider 
combination, in which corporate identity, advertising, display, and promotion 
play an important part. Designing a package is not a simple matter, it also has to 
fulfill a set of requirements which are followed by logical thinking. A good 
package design is the one that logically take into account the after-usage impact 
of the design. Some package designs so far have fulfilled this requirement, but 
many others do not pay attention to this. This has resulted in the excessive 
amount of packages made of material which is difficult to recycle such as that 
aluminum foil used for sachet (a small disposable bag). Waste food containers 
in the form of sachet are abundant in Indonesia, not only in big but also small 
cities, even villages. Everyday some passengers also throw food sachets out of 
buses and trains passing cities and villages.  It is difficult to understand that 
low-price chips marketed among poor people are wrapped in a fairly luxurious 
aluminum foil with beautiful design on the outside of the package. This Ågsachet 
cultureÅh plays a very important part in visual pollution. 
Shopfront designs also contribute a lot to the lingering visual pollution. The 
purpose of a shopfront is to display goods for sale and entice customers into the 
shop. A well-designed shopfront will create a good impression to potential 
customers. Unfortunately, many shopfronts in the cities in Indonesia are not 
well-designed, although they are attractive. They are often filled with excessive 
signs in the form of flat boards or individual letters. Small banners are 
sometimes added. The number of advertisements tends to be kept to a 
maximum. It is not clear whether this has something to do with the mentality of 
most Indonesians. Sizes, materials, and detailing of many shopfront designs 
even do not respect the age and character of the buildings. This defacement is 
common in many big cities. 
 Visual Pollution in the Context of Conflicting Design  195 
 
Graffiti has been a very serious, long problem in many big cities in Indonesia. 
Graffiti is any type of public markings scratched or painted on various surfaces, 
especially walls. Spray paint and markers have become the most popular 
materials. Sometimes graffiti is made to convey political messages or publicize 
the name of a youth gang. Graffiti may become a form of vandalism when it is 
made to deface property without the property owner?s permission. In big cities, 
overpass footings have also been covered with graffiti as advertisements. 
Conflicting logics are also obvious here. In engineering or design perspective, 
an overpass is not supposed to be covered with any advertisement, including 
graffiti. It is justifiable to say that graffiti as advertisement is vandalistic and out 
of context with the environment if it is made on the wrong surface. But local 
governments might think that graffiti as advertisement is not vandalistic or out 
of context with the environment as long as it is artistic and generate income. 
4 Conclusion: Possible Ban of Outdoor Visual Pollution 
Visual pollution has caused people in Indonesian cities unable to view esthetic 
objects in full or in proper placement. Advertisements have been bitterly 
criticized. Out of the examples mentioned above, billboards dominate the 
landscape in cities, especially big cities in Indonesia. They invade citizen?s 
privacy day and night. Meanwhile, cigarette billboards are truly the king of 
outdoor advertising world and probably tobacco products are the most heavily 
advertised type of product. Even though generally billboards in the streets of 
cities in this country were designed following a set of requirements and logical 
thinking, most billboards were made out of context with the environment or 
with the already existing elements. 
Today opposition grows very rapidly in the world against advertising. It is the 
most hated of all designs. Many cities in the world have banned advertising. 
Since 2006 Gilberto Kassab, the mayor of Sao Paulo, Brazil?s most important 
city, has been successful in banning outdoor advertising and becomes a hero. 
The news about his daring policy has spread all over the world. Prior to that 
year, Sao Paulo was recognized as one of the billboard and sign jungles of the 
world. Some people think that outdoor advertising should be banned from any 
city. Some other people, however, think that if advertisements are removed 
from a city, it will become a bland concrete jungles. I am of the opinion that not 
all designs, especially advertisements, are supposed to be blamed for visual 
pollution. Every city in Indonesia needs a clean-city law to control illegal 
advertisements and signs. It is possible to make legal yet attractive 
advertisements that will give positive contribution to Ågvisual democracyÅh in 
Indonesia. In the case of billboards, it is advisable to relocate them in order not 
to block good views in many places, not only cities. 
196 Sumartono 
Reference 
[1] Maser, Siegfried. 1992. Product Appearance and Product Quality, in 
Objects and Images: Studies in Design and Advertising, ed. Susann 
Vihma. Helsinki: University of Industrial Arts Helsinki. 
[2] Rivett, David. 1992. Project Management, in Professional Practice in 
Design Consultancy, ed Liz Lydiate. London: the Design Council. 
[3] Krippendorff, Klaus. 1995. On  the  Essential Contexts of   Artifacts or on 
the Proposition that ÅeDesign is Making Sense (of Things), in The Idea of 
Design, ed. Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan. Cambridge, Mass., 
and London: MIT Press. 
[4] Buchanan, Richard. 1995. Wicked Problems in Design Thinking, in The 
Idea of Design, ed. Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan. Cambridge, 
Mass., and London: MIT Press. 
 
 
 
