  
ITB J. ICT, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2012, 171-182               171 
 
Received June 23
rd
, 2012, Revised September 26
th
, 2012, Accepted for publication September 27
th
, 2012. 
Copyright ? 2012 Published by LPPM ITB, ISSN: 1978-3086, DOI: 10.5614/itbj.ict.2012.6.2.5 
Development of a Two-Channel Simultaneous 
Photoplethysmography Recording System 
Kim Soon Chong
1
, Kok Beng Gan
2
 & Mohd. Ali Mohd. Alauddin
1,2
 
1Department of Electrical, Electronic & Systems Engineering, Faculty of Engineering & 
Built Environment, University Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Malaysia.  
2Institute of Space Science, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,  
43600 UKM Bangi, Malaysia 
Email: gankokbeng@ukm.my 
 
 
Abstract. Multi-site photoplethysmograph (PPG) recording enables researchers 
to study the vascular and hemodynamic properties of human subjects. Currently, 
there is no commercial system available in the market to perform either one-
channel or multi-channel PPG recording. PPG is an optoelectronic technique that 
measures changes in blood volume associated with cardiac contraction. The 
measurements can be obtained from fingertips, ear lobes and toes due to their 
low absorption and high degree of vasculature. The main objective of this project 
is to develop a two-channel simultaneous PPG recording system to acquire PPG 
signals from two different physiological sites using a Nellcor equivalent PPG 
probe. MATLAB software was used during the development phase to ensure 
rapid prototyping. The experiment results show that there was no inter-channel 
delay in the developed two-channel PPG system. Our preliminary results show 
that the delays between the left and the right arm were from 4 to 12 ms in three 
healthy random subjects. The system is portable, powered by universal serial bus 
(USB) and allows the user to do the PPG data acquisition in a clinical setting. 
Keywords: cardiovascular risk; multi-site; non-invasive; photoplethysmograph; pulse 
wave transit time; simultaneous acquisition.  
1 Introduction 
In recent years, the study of the cardiovascular system [1-4] of individuals from 
an early age has been given an increasing social importance. It has been 
demonstrated that most heart and vessel diseases are initiated either genetically 
or induced by lifestyle. Furthermore, ageing is a natural process in humans, 
which currently is heavily modified by environmental influences [1]. Therefore, 
the vascular age of an individual may differ from his or her chronological age. 
Ageing has been defined as a gradual loss of organ functions, especially in the 
cardiovascular system, where the major effect of ageing is a decrease of vessel 
compliance in the arterial system. According to the World Health Organization 
(WHO), cardiovascular diseases (CVD) were one of the top killer diseases in 
Malaysia during the year 2009 [5]. The main cause of CVD is atherosclerosis 
172 Kim Soon Chong, et al. 
where fat or plaque is accumulating on the artery walls of blood vessels [6]. The 
accumulation of fat or plaque will cause the formation of lesions that eventually 
grow and thicken to narrow the arteries, which slows blood flow [7], and finally 
the blood vessels will lose their rigidity and elasticity. 
PPG is an optoelectronic method for measuring and recording changes in the 
volume of body parts such as fingers and ear lobes caused by changes in the 
volume of the arterial oxygenated blood associated with cardiac contraction [8]. 
When light travels through biological tissue (earlobe, toe or finger), it is 
absorbed by different substances [9]. Primary absorbers are skin pigmentation, 
bones and arterial and venous blood. Arterial ageing and arterial disease 
influence the characteristics of the PPG pulse [10]. The simplest PPG probe 
consists of a light emitting diode (LED) and a photo-detector. The LED 
transmits light with an intensity that is proportional to the LED drive current. 
The photo-detector is usually a silicon photodiode that produces a current 
proportional to the incident light on it. Improved technology in photodiodes and 
LEDs allow the LED and photodiode to be small enough to fit in small fingertip 
probes. The probes can be of the transmission or the reflection type. 
The PPG signal can be affected by various physiological factors, so analysis of 
the PPG signal can provide sufficient information about the individualÅfs health 
condition and more specifically about cardiovascular performance [11]. The 
higher-frequency components (0.5 Hz?30 Hz) in PPG pulses from the left and 
the right side of normal subjects are highly correlated [12]. The results of this 
research show that pulse timing, amplitude and shape of the higher-frequency 
components of the PPG waveforms are similar at the right and the left side of 
the body in three different sites (fingers, toes and earlobes) since their 
anatomical structure is similar. Therefore, any difference in vessel properties 
can affect the time and shape of the rising edge (anacrotic phase) and falling 
edge (catacrotic phase) of the PPG signal, which can indicate pathological 
changes [12,13]. A time delay between PPG signals from the left and the right 
arm is evidence of an increase in vascular resistance. A delay between pulses 
from right and left toes in healthy individuals and patients with some occlusion 
in the leg has also been reported [3,13,14]. This delay was found to be 20 to 80 
ms for patients with arterial stenosis in one leg [14]. This group also had an 
increased pulse wave transit time (PWTT) due to higher vascular resistance. 
The PWTT is the time for a pulse to travel between two artery sites. The speed 
at which the arterial pressure wave travels is directly proportional to the blood 
pressure. An acute rise in blood pressure causes the vascular tone to increase 
and the arterial wall to become stiffer, and shortens the PWTT. 
The main problem with multi-site PPG is the data acquisition process. This 
instrument has always been custom-made, application specific and developed 
 Simultaneous Photoplethysmography Recording System 173 
 
by the researchers [3,12,15,16]. Normally, rapid prototyping tools and a data 
acquisition system such as Virtual Instrumentation (National Instruments Corp.) 
are used to fabricate a multichannel PPG system [12,16]. This laboratory 
prototype is suitable for research purposes but not for commercialization or 
clinical trials. Furthermore, no such commercial devices are available in the 
market and if they exist it is only as an option for the device. Until now, the 
acquisition of two-channel PPG signals has been done using two independent 
PPG systems, a synchronization system and a personal computer [15]. This 
introduces an uncontrollable artificial delay because the data acquisition is 
started manually. A possible solution is to use a Barker sequence code to 
synchronize the recorded PPG signals using offline signal processing [15]. The 
synchronization of multi-channel PPG signals (Figure 1) may eliminate the 
unwanted delay in the PWTT but the apparatus of the recording signal is still 
complex and its mobility is limited [15]. 
 
Figure 1 Apparatus for two-channel PPG recording using two independent 
systems. 
In this research, a two-channel simultaneous PPG system was designed and 
developed to acquire PPG signals simultaneously from two physiological sites. 
The system simplifies the PPG data acquisition process by using a 16-bit two-
channel analog-to-digital converter (ADC). It digitizes and samples the PPG 
signals simultaneously from two different physiological sites, namely, the index 
finger of the left and of the right hand. Both signals will then be transferred to a 
personal computer via USB for further analysis using MATLAB (The 
MathWorks, Inc.). 
174 Kim Soon Chong, et al. 
2 Material and Methods 
2.1 Analog Design 
A basic block diagram of the two-channel PPG system is shown in Figure 2. It 
consists of an analog and a digital design. In the analog design, the PPG signals 
are obtained by using two PPG probes (DS-100A, Covidien). The infrared LED 
(910 nm) is driven by a LED driver (LT1932, Linear Technology Inc.) at 100 
mA. The main function of the LED driver is to maintain the intensity of the 
infrared LED in the probes so that the intensity is not affected by the power 
supply. The light is transmitted through the finger and detected by the 
photodiode located at the opposite side of the LED. A trans-impedance 
amplifier (OP474) is used to convert the detected current into voltage.  
 
Figure 2 Basic block diagram of the two-channel PPG system. 
 
Figure 3 Bode diagram of the second-order Sallen Key Filter. 
 Simultaneous Photoplethysmography Recording System 175 
 
The unwanted high frequency noise in the PPG signal is eliminated using a 
second-order Sallen Key lowpass filter with a cutoff frequency of 10 Hz at -3 
dB. The cutoff frequency of 10 Hz was chosen considering the frequency 
content of the PPG signal (0.6-30 Hz) and because it is far removed from the 50 
Hz power line noise, even at the transition band (Figure 3). The presence of the 
50 Hz power line noise does affect data visualization during data acquisition. 
2.2 Digital Design 
In the digital design, the analog PPG signal is converted into digital format 
using a 16-bits dual channel ADS8361 ADC. One of the applications of this 
instrument is to detect changes in vascular stiffness. The physiological delay 
between two physiological sites in healthy subjects is normally below 20 ms 
[11]. The PPG signals from the left and the right index finger are sampled at 2 
kHz so that the physiological delay can be observed. The sampling process is 
performed using simultaneous ADC sampling to avoid any artificial delay due 
to the sampling process.  
The digitized PPG signal is sent to a 8-bits microcontroller (PIC18F2550) and 
communicates with a computer via USB. The role of the microcontroller is to 
control the ADC sampling process and get the data from the ADC. 
Subsequently, the digitized data are processed and sent to a computer using 
USB communication. The firmware was developed using C language and 
compiled using PICC (CCS-C, Inc). The USB driver was installed in the 
operating system to establish the communication between the microcontroller 
and the computer. 
2.3 Data Acquisition Software 
The graphical user interface (GUI) and signal processing of the system was 
developed using MATLAB R2012b (The MathWorks, Inc.). This GUI was used 
to display the acquired PPG signals and save them in a text file for pre-
processing at a later stage. The PPG signals were plotted in real-time for 
viewing and signal quality control.  
A digital signal processing algorithm was developed to pre-process the PPG 
signals (Figure 3). This algorithm consists of channel separation, detrending, 
band-pass filter, scale-to-one and finally determination of the physiological 
delay using the cross-correlation method.  
The serial data transfer protocol was used to transfer the digital data from the 
ADC to the microcontroller. Therefore, a channel separation algorithm is 
needed to separate the acquired signals into two-channel PPG signals. 
176 Kim Soon Chong, et al. 
Subsequently, the linear trend of the PPG signals is removed by detrending the 
input signal, i.e. the mean value is subtracted from the data.  
The signal is further processed to remove the effect of the respiratory rhythm 
and higher frequency disturbance by applying a band-pass filter at a frequency 
range of 0.6?15 Hz. This is an effective spectrum for PPG signals used for 
physiological signal modeling. The band-pass filter is a custom-designed digital 
filter using the Fast Fourier Transform method. The unwanted frequency band 
is masked with zeroes before performing the Inverse Fast Fourier Transform to 
reconstruct the time-domain PPG signals. The pre-processed signal then 
undergoes a scale-to-one process where the signal is normalized to unity (range 
0 to 1). The cross-correlation function of MATLAB is used to determine the 
time delay between the PPG signals acquired from the left and the right arm in 
5-second blocks. The estimated delay is given by the negative of the lag for 
which the normalized cross-correlation has the largest absolute value. 
 
Figure 4 Pre-processing block diagram to find the delay between two-channel 
PPG signals. 
3 Results and Discussions 
3.1 Two-Channel PPG Recording System 
The schematic of the two-channel PPG recording systems is shown in Figure 4. 
This was turned into a double-layer printed circuit board (PCB). In this system, 
the PCB board was partitioned into an analog and a digital section to avoid 
interference of analog and digital signals. The digital logic ground currents 
remain in the digital section and will not interfere with the analog currents. 
Besides that, the location of the passive components could also affect the noise 
level. For example, the decoupling capacitor should be placed as near as 
 Simultaneous Photoplethysmography Recording System 177 
 
possible to the integrated circuit (IC) to effectively reduce the noise in the 
circuit. Figure 5 shows the final prototype of the two-channel PPG system. This 
system comprises of two probes and a data acquisition module. Its power source 
is the USB port and it communicates with the computer using high speed (12 
Mbps) USB communication. 
 
 
Figure 5 The schematic of the two-channel PPG. 
 
 
Figure 6 Two-channel PPG system. 
178 Kim Soon Chong, et al. 
The frequency response of the second-order low-pass filter is shown in Figure 
6. Note that the response in the passband was flat with no ripple. The power 
roll-off approaches 36 dB per decade in the limit of high frequency. This filter 
design effectively attenuated the power line noise at 50 Hz.   
 
 
Figure 7 Second-order Sallen Key lowpass filter frequency response. 
3.2 Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
When the user starts the program, a message box is prompted to remind the user 
to attach the PPG devices before starting the data acquisition. A real-time plot 
of the two-channel PPG signal is shown in Figure. 7. Figure 8 shows the 
acquired two-channel PPG signal. Channel 1 is shown in Figure 8 (top) and 
channel 2 is shown in Figure 8 (bottom). Since the PWTT calculation is beyond 
the scope of this discussion, its results will not be presented here. 
 
Figure 8 Real-time plot of the two-channel PPG system 
 Simultaneous Photoplethysmography Recording System 179 
 
 
Figure 9 Channel 1 (top) and channel 2 (bottom) of the PPG signal 
3.3 Two-Channel Simultaneous PPG Recording Test 
To test the two-channel simultaneous PPG recording system, a sine wave with a 
1 Hz frequency and a 1 Vpk-pk was generated using a function generator. It was 
connected to two ADC inputs and sampled at 2000 kHz (Figure 9). In this 
experiment, the test frequency was 1 Hz because this is close to the human heart 
rate frequency. Note that the noise arising from the ADC switching effect was 
not visualized after pre-processing. However, the peaks arising from the ADC 
switching are undesired and will affect the accuracy of the results if the problem 
remains unsolved. The delay estimation using the cross-correlation technique 
showed that there was no inter-channel delay between the test signals. The 
result showed that both channels were simultaneously recorded with the ADC. 
 
Figure 10 Sine wave (1 Hz) acquired using the two-channel PPG system at a 
2000 Hz sampling rate. 
180 Kim Soon Chong, et al. 
During the data acquisition session, the subjects were asked to abstain from 
consuming food, alcohol and caffeine for at least 4-6 hours prior to the 
experiment to avoid the vasodilation effect from these substances. Upon arrival, 
the subjects were asked to rest for 10 minutes to ensure a stable pulse during the 
data recording session. Figure 10 shows the two-channel PPG signal acquired 
from the left and the right index finger of a healthy subject using the developed 
PPG system. The preliminary results show that the delay between the left and 
the right arm ranged from 4 to 12 ms in three healthy random subjects. 
However, the analysis of the PWTT for cardiovascular risk assessment needs 
more clinical data and medical records for validation. 
Besides that, power management is an important issue because the maximum 
power that can be sourced from the USB is 500mW. This can only be achieved 
if there is no sharing of the same USB port. Another observation was that the 
acquired PPG signals were noisy. This was due to the switching effect of the 
ADC. The ADS8361 is a successive approximation (SAR) ADC architecture. 
The switching effect can be eliminated by either replacing it with a delta sigma 
ADC architecture or adding an analog front-end circuit to the system. 
 
Figure 11 Simultaneous two-channel PPG signal recording from left and right 
index fingers. 
4 Conclusions 
 In this project, a two-channel simultaneous PPG recording system was 
successfully designed and developed. It is portable, powered by USB port and 
allows users to do data acquisition in a clinical environment. The cross-
correlation technique was used to estimate the delay between both channels. 
The sine wave experiment showed that there is no inter-channel delay in the 
system. Our preliminary results showed that the delay between the left and the 
 Simultaneous Photoplethysmography Recording System 181 
 
right arm was from 4 to 12 ms in three healthy random subjects. However, 
medical data are required to validate these results and more data need to be 
acquired to establish the method for cardiovascular risk assessment. 
One of the problems observed during the development of the system was the 
noise problem resulting from the ADC switching effect. As for future work, the 
system can be improved by using a proper ADC or an analog front-end circuit 
to avoid this switching effect. The GUI can be improved by adding extra 
functions such as the determination of the CVD risk. Furthermore, a graphical 
LCD display can be added to show the CVD risk to the users. This device can 
be further developed into a cardiovascular risk assessment system for 
community health screening. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia for sponsoring 
this work under Research University Grant UKM-GUP-2011-352 & GGPM-
2011-074. 
References  
[1] Zahedi, E., Chellappan, K., Mohd Alauddin, M.A. & Singh, H, Analysis 
of the Effect of Ageing on Rising Edge Characteristics of the Photople-
thysmogram using a Modified Windkessel Model, Cardiovascular 
Engineering, 7, pp. 172-181, 2009. 
[2] Allen, J., Overbeck, K., Stansby, G. & Murray, A, Photoplethysmography 
Assessments in Cardiovascular Disease, Measurement Control, 39, pp. 
80-83, 2006. 
[3] Allen, J., Oates, C.P., Lees, T.A. & Murray, A., Photoplethysmography 
Detection of Lower Limb Peripheral Arterial Occlusive Disease: A 
Comparison of Pulse Timing, Amplitude and Shape Characteristics, 
Physiological Measurement, 26, pp. 811-821, 2005. 
[4] Allen, J. & Murray, A., Age-Related Changes in Peripheral Pulse Shape 
Characteristics at Various Body Sites, Physiological Measurement, 24, 
pp. 297-307, 2003. 
[5] World Health Organization, Cause of death in Malaysia, Geneva: WHO, 
2009. 
[6] Laurent, S., Boutouyrie, P., Asmar, R., Gautier, I., Laloux, B., Guize, L. 
Ducimetiere, P. & Benetos, A., Aortic Stiffness is An Independent 
Predictor of All-Cause and Cardiovascular Mortality in Hypertensive 
Patients, Hypertension, 37, pp.1236-1241, 2011. 
[7] Oliver, J.J. & Webb, D.J., Noninvasive Assessment of Arterial Stiffness 
and Risk of Atherosclerotic Events, Arterioscler Thromb Vasc. Biol., 23, 
pp. 554-566, 2003. 
182 Kim Soon Chong, et al. 
[8] Bronzino, J.D, The Biomedical Engineering Handbook, 1, Florida: CRC 
Press LLC, 2000. 
[9] Bhattacharya, P.P., Kanjilal & Muralidhar, V., Analysis and 
Characterization of Photoplethysmographic Signal, IEEE Transsaction of 
Biomedical Engineering, 48, pp. 5-11, 2001. 
[10] Allen, J. & Murray, A., Variability of Photoplethysmography Peripheral 
Pulse Measurements At The Ears, Thumbs and Toes, IEEE Proceeding 
Science and Technology, 147(6), pp. 403-407, 2000. 
[11] Allen, J., Photoplethysmography and Its Application in Clinical 
Physiological Measurement, Physiological Measurement, 28, R1, 2007. 
[12] Allen, J. & Murray, A., Similarity in Bilateral Photoplethysmographic 
Peripheral Pulse Wave Characteristics At The Ears Thumbs and Toes, 
Physiological Measurement, 21, pp. 369-377, 2000. 
[13] Spigulis, J., Erts, R., & Ozols, M., Optical Multi-Channel Monitoring of 
Skin Blood Pulsations for Cardiovascular Assessment, SPIE Proc 
Advanced Biomedical and Clinical Diagnostic Systems, 5318, p.133-139, 
2004. 
[14] Erts, R., Spigulis, J., Kukulis, I., & Ozols, M., Bilateral Photople-
thysmography Studies of The Leg Arterial Stenosis, Physiological 
Measurement, 26, pp. 865-874, 2005. 
[15] Zahedi, E. & Mohd. Ali, M.A., Dual-Channel Photoplethysmography 
Synchronization Using A Barker Sequence, Conference Procedings IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2, pp. 1952-1955, 2005. 
[16] Spigulis, J., Venckus, G. & Ozols, M., Optical Sensing for Early 
Cardiovascular Diagnostic, Proceedings SPIE, 3911, pp. 27-31, 2000. 
 
