  
ITB J. Vis. Art & Des., Vol. 3, No. 2, 2009, 115-128                      115 
 
The Revival of the Usage of Natural Fibers and Natural 
Dyes in Indonesian Textile  
Dian Widiawati 
Craft and Tradition Research Group, Faculty of fine Art and Design,  
Bandung Institute of Technology 
 
 
Abstract. Indonesia is known to possess abundant natural resources as well as a 
diverse textile tradition. Some examples of traditional textile materials are those 
made from indigenous natural fibers, such as silk, cotton, ramie, pineapple 
fibers, and banana frond fibers, which make use of natural dyes. The specific 
natural back ground and unique cultural tradition of a region strongly influence 
the creative process of local textile artisans and the visual form of textile works. 
After the invention of synthetic dyes, the usage of natural dyes has gradually 
decreased. However, the optimism in using traditional dyes recently emerges in 
the textile world in Indonesia. This tendency grows along with the issues of 
awareness of nature and the soaring popularity of back-to-nature lifestyle.  
This study attempts to identify the relations between the usage of natural dyes in 
the past and its relevance to contemporary contexts. This study focuses on 
several topics, firstly the past role of natural dyes and the invention of synthetic 
dyes which outgrow natural dyes. Then, this study aims to explain why natural 
dyes are recently being reused in textile, which leads to identifying the 
contemporary position or role of natural dyes, besides the existence of synthetic 
dyes which technically possess various advantages. This study also aspires to 
identify the advantages and shortcomings of natural dyes based on the 
consumers? acceptance and certain contexts. The method used in this study is the 
qualitative descriptive method through interdisciplinary approaches. 
Keywords: natural dyes; natural fibers; Indonesian traditional textile; textile. 
1 Introduction  
This paper comprises the preliminary research which discusses the revival of 
natural fibers and dyes in Indonesian textile. This paper also includes data of the 
usage of natural dyes in several regions in Indonesia and assumptions on the 
causes of revival, which requires further study.  
Until the mid -19
th
 century, when synthetic dyes came into use, all colors came 
from natural sources. How ever natural substances were used as body paint, 
cosmetics and coloring for pottery and baskets long before they were applied to 
textile fibers. Over 15,000 years ago our ancestor were using natural pigments 
to decorate the wall of cave painting of Altamira in Northern Spain and Lascaux 
in the south of France show. 
116 Dian Widiawati 
Many of these colors were of mineral rather than plant origin. They derived 
from deposits of iron, colored clay, malachite, and lapis lazuli. For example, 
and were often ground into pigment is easier to apply than a dye, because the 
finally ground color particles, which are held in suspension in a liquid, often 
with a thickener, are applied to the surface only. However, for a dye to be 
effective, the color particles must dissolve solution and must then be absorbed 
by the fiber molecules. The process is complicated by the fact that many dyes 
do not remain permanently fixed to the fiber without the used of some other 
substance to act as a bond mordant, from the Latin word mordere, meaning 
ÅgbiteÅh or ÅgfastenÅh. The most common mordant are metallic compounds of 
aluminum, iron, or copper. 
In all probability, the earliest dyes were not fixed permanently to the fibers 
using a chemical mordant, and dyeing simply meant that the fibers were soaked 
or simmered in solutions from plants or other materials and became stained as a 
result.  
2 Using Natural Dyes in Indonesia 
Natural dyes for textiles have been used in Indonesia for quite a long time. 
These dyes are produced from wood or barks, leaves or roots of plants or trees 
from throughout the archipelago. Thus, from region to region, the colors 
obtained from these dyes are quite similar. 
In the past, natural fibers and dyes were traditionally used as textile materials, 
which usage was emphasized on the fulfillment of spiritual purposes and the 
production of sacred traditional fabrics. It is unsurprising that the production 
process was usually time-consuming and highly complicated.  
Traditional textiles, such as batik and weaving utilize various natural dyes taken 
from the surroundings of the producers, resulting in the invention of distinct 
regional colors, such as the characteristic red of the Lasem, batik taken from the 
mengkudu/noni roots (Morinda citrifolia). The characteristic dark blue from 
Tuban comes from the colouring process using the tarum/blue dye taken from 
indigo (Indigofera tinctoria). The yellowish brown to reddish brown color 
range, often found in batik from Yogya and Surakarta, comes from the soga 
plant (Peltophorum ferrugineium). The color range is also known as the sogan 
colors.  
Natural colors in batik may be expressed in seemingly unlimited possibilities. 
The natural colors are formed through the dialectic of natural growth, a dynamic 
which is flexible, gentle, relaxed, naturally processed, and unhurried. This 
limitless can be described as a unique and ever-changing creation. 
 Natural Fibers and Natural Dyes in Indonesian Textile 117 
 
The limitlessness of the possibilities may be seen as a unique and ever-changing 
creation. Two same mixtures of natural coloring matters using the same 
ingredients will not produce the exact same color. 
The invention of synthetic dyes in 1856 in England by William Perkin, quickly 
replaced the usage of natural dyes. The red alizarin usually taken from the 
madder plant was replaced by a synthetic dye invented by Perkin and two 
German chemists; Graebe and Liebermann. The following years saw the 
development of synthetic indigo by Adolf von Baeyer (1904) to produce blue 
dyes [1]. 
The advent of synthetic dyes in Indonesia in the 1930s rendered the natural dyes 
obsolete. The process of batik production which had usually involved natural 
dyes, such as soga, indigo, and mengkudu roots, began to utilize synthetic dyes, 
such as naftol, indigosol, and rapid, direct, and reactive. In the following 
decades, textile producers using natural dyes were a rarity. 
 
Figure 1 Another detail of a coastal batik sarong, from Lasem. The natural red 
dye is taken from the roots of mengkudu/noni (Morinda Cirifolia) or, in 
Sundanese, pace. Repeated dyeing for the desired colors causes the dye to be 
absorbed through the small cracks in the blocking wax. This process results in 
the lines or spots that wholly enrich the motif [2]. 
118 Dian Widiawati 
 
Figure 2 Royal ceremonial skirt cloth (Godot Bangun Tolak Alas-Alasan 
Pinarada Mas), from Surakarta, Java, Indonesia, late 19th century, cotton, 
natural dyes, gold leaf, stitch-resist dyeing, gold-leaf gluework [3]. 
 
Figure 3 Hinggi Kombu (detail) from East Sumba, with the characteristic red 
from mengkudu roots [4]. 
Nevertheless, the optimism in using natural coloring matters is recently 
awakening. This tendency grows along with the issues of awareness of nature 
and the soaring popularity of back-to-nature lifestyle, which seem to counteract 
the issue of global warming. The awareness in using environmentally friendly 
products is currently increasing, causing the emergence of products labeled 
green design, green product, eco-labeling, eco-fashions, and several others. The 
 Natural Fibers and Natural Dyes in Indonesian Textile 119 
 
products which are recently gathering attention from the aware consumers are 
the textile products made of indigenous natural fibers and using natural coloring 
matters. Those products are considered environmentally friendly. 
3 The Preparation of Natural Dyes 
The traditional way to obtain perfect dyes is in general by immersing material 
such as leave, bark or roots and seed, etc. in water. Usually they use big 
earthenware as container and last about five or more days, depending on the 
material that are immersing. After the material is decayed and dissolved, the 
sediment is discarded and ingredients such as variety of soils, ash or chalk, and 
others are then added. The kind of ingredients as well as the process of 
preparing the dyes sometimes differs from region to region, which in the same 
time determents the quality as well as the shade of color though the basic 
material is the same. 
The shade can become the characteristic of the particular region, or even of a 
particular craft person. The mixing of dyes and process of dyeing are in them-
selves trade secrets of the craft person, even of the particular tribe. 
4 The Process of Dyeing 
Dyeing with natural dyes takes time. This is the reason why people now prefer 
to use synthetic dyes, since they are easier to handle and offer a greater variety 
of colors. In the old day, the dyeing is considered woman?s work, and was even 
thought to be taboo for men. 
Certain preconditions have to be met before the dyeing process could be started. 
For instance one has to fast or mutih (drinking only water and eating white rice), 
to rid her from negative emotions. There are also who give offerings before 
staring the dyeing process to avoid failure. But to day, using synthetic dyes, 
dyeing is done by men and the old preconditions are no longer applied. 
5 Various Kind of Natural Dyes 
Traditional natural dyes which at present are not much used anymore, are 
obtained from plants or trees and roots, include: 
Blue: also called indigo or nila, is obtained from the tarum or tom plant 
(indigofera tinctoria). The branches and leaves are soaked in water for several 
days, and then mixed with various kind of ingredients and water is filtered, used 
as dyes. 
120 Dian Widiawati 
Red: this color is obtained from the mengkudu (morinda citrifolia) or from 
sepang (caesalpinia sapan) tree. The roots are pounded and then soaken in 
water mixed with other inggredients. The colors made from the sepang tree are 
brighter than that made from the mengkudu tree, and mixed with certain 
ingredients one will obtain purple and reddish brown color [5]: 
1. Sogan (brown): obtained from the extract of the bark of the tinggik tree 
(ceriop candolleana); used to dye from light to dark brown. 
2. Black: extracted from pulverized fruit of kind of black wood 
(diospyroebenam). It also can be obtained by mixing dark blue and dark red 
dyes or by re-dyeing the already dark blue colored cloth with dark red dyes. 
There are people who immerse the cloth in black mud. 
3. Reddish brown: from the leaves of the jati tree (tectona grandis); a dull 
brown color is obtained from the wood of the pinang tree (areca catechu) 
and the wood of kayu tinggik. 
4. Yellow: from the root of the kunyit or turmeric plant (curcuma domestica) 
and the leaves of the related plant (carthamus tinctorius), and from the 
leaves and bark of the mango tree (mangifera laurinia) and jack-fruit tree 
(artocarpus intergrifolia). 
5. Green: from the leaves of the cotton plant and the bark of the mango tree. 
This color can also be obtained by re-dyeing of the yellow dyed cloth/yarn 
with blue dye. 
6. Purple: from the peel of the mangos-teen fruit (garcinia mongostana). It is 
believed that any event or happening in one?s life is inseparable with nature. 
6 Plants Producing Natural Dyes 
 
Figure 4 INDIGO/TARUM (Indigofera tinctoria) and its variation of colors 
[1]. 
 Natural Fibers and Natural Dyes in Indonesian Textile 121 
 
 
Figure 5 KESUMBA/GALINGGEM (Bixa orelana) [1] and its variation of 
colors. 
 
Figure 6 KUNIR (Curcuma domestica) and its variation of colors [1]. 
7 Textiles Using Natural Fibers and Dyes in Modern Indonesia 
Since the invention of aniline synthetic dyes at the end of the 19th century by 
German scientist, the role of natural dyes has been fading. Only those who 
appreciate the value of traditional textiles and their accompanying cultural 
contents could comprehend the uniqueness of natural dyes. They are usually 
historians, cultural elites, collectors, and artists [4]. 
122 Dian Widiawati 
The appreciation of natural fibers and dyes leads to the formation of 
communities of natural dye textile enthusiasts. These communities usually 
emphasize on prestige and concerns toward issues of environment, 
environment-friendly concepts, back-to-nature lifestyles, as well as the 
appreciation of the values of national culture.  
In the modern era, certain producers begin to find ways to produce textiles using 
natural dyes based on traditional process, but with a higher efficiency rate, by 
replacing, for instance, other traditional ingredients with newer materials, to 
ensure faster and more complete color absorption.  
The recent usage of natural dyes in Indonesia is emphasized more on the 
consumers? need to find alternative products containing local values. Those 
products also contain historic and nostalgic values, and are, therefore, more 
?human,? as well as considered more environmentally friendly. The more 
complicated production process compared to that of the synthetic dyes, results 
in higher prices and exclusivity. For this reason, textiles made of natural fibers 
and dyes belong to a different class, not equal to those produced using synthetic 
dyes, although each has its own special role. Synthetic dyes were invented due 
to high consumer demands which cannot be quantitatively fulfilled by natural 
dyes.  
Based on a brief observation, there are several differences between the 
Indonesian traditional textiles which are related to the customs of their origins 
and the non-traditional textiles which also make use of natural fibers and dyes. 
The differences cover several aspects, namely:  
1. purpose of making 
2. philosophical background  
3. production process  
4. visuals: ornaments and colors  
5. production technique 
6. usage 
Those aspects may be elaborated as the following: 
1. Indonesian traditional textiles related to the customs of their origins. These 
textiles exclusively use natural fibers and dyes and they usually possess 
these aspects: 
a. They are made to fulfill ritual or religious purposes of certain traditional 
beliefs (the production process is part of the ritual)  
b. They contain certain philosophies, depending on their origins.  
 Natural Fibers and Natural Dyes in Indonesian Textile 123 
 
c. Their production process involves proficient skills and is usually time-
consuming.  
d. Visually, they are swarmed with ornaments, rich in colors, complicated, 
and detailed.  
e. Their ornaments possess symbolic values  
f. They are used for certain traditional rituals.  
2. Non-traditional textiles using natural fibers and dyes:  
a. They are made to fulfill the demands of alternative and environmentally 
friendly products which possess local values.  
b. They are almost sterile from philosophical values, and usually bring 
about environmental values.  
c. Their production process is arguably simple and short, with new 
breakthroughs toward efficiency.  
d. Visually, they are relatively simple, using one or two colors for the sake 
of efficiency.  
e. The ornaments are usually decorative and occasionally symbolic.  
f. Their usage is not limited to rituals and is, therefore, more flexible. 
 
Figure 7 An example of traditional fabric using natural dyes: Geringsing 
Cecempaka Retang. The fabric is made of brownish red and pale yellow cotton 
threads. The ornaments used are double ties with floral, spiraling leave, and 
champaca flower patterns, interspersed by star shapes and other geometrical 
lines. Geringsing in the pangur gigi (teeth filing) ritual is considered having a 
magical power, especially to repel bad luck during the ritual [4]. 
124 Dian Widiawati 
 
Figure 8 An example of non-traditional textile work by Mia Megasari. The 
materials used are pineapple fiber and sapan wood /dark red dyewood 
(Caesalpinia sappan L) natural dye. (Picture: Dian Widiawati). 
8 The Opportunity of Natural Dyes Revival 
The discussion of the possibilities of reusing natural dyes is currently 
increasing. One of the causing factors of this discussion is the regulation that 
prohibits the usage of certain synthetic dyes, due to their chemical ingredients 
which may be harmful for human beings and the environment. The prohibited 
dyes, for example, are those containing the diazonium salt (such as naftol, 
which is widely used in batik production), since the salt is a carcinogenic 
substance [6]. The regulation brings about a considerable impact to the 
production sector, especially in the sector known as textile and textile products, 
and to the consumers of the synthetic dyes in general. The possibility of using 
natural dyes as the substitute for synthetic dyes is currently undergoing 
research. According to recent information, the reusing of natural dyes will 
involve varied and complex activities. The usage of natural dyes as the 
substitute needs further careful research and consideration.  
One of the basic problems of the present usage of natural dyes is the historical 
background of how natural dyes are left behind in favor of synthetic dyes. The 
discourses on this problem reveals various facts, especially concerning the 
contexts and relation to the social, economic, and production  technology fields, 
which may be considered as a valuable input before applying the usage of 
natural dyes, especially for textile and textile products. Thus so, natural dyes 
 Natural Fibers and Natural Dyes in Indonesian Textile 125 
 
may be positioned in a proportional and proper role among the heterogeneity of 
similar products currently demanded by consumers. The social context brings 
into light the shift of cultural values and its impact toward popularity, 
appreciation, and re-appreciation of traditional cultural products. Within the 
context of the existence and usage of traditional textiles, the usage of natural 
dyes is not merely a process of engineering the production of technology. 
From the aspect of socio-economical technology, natural dyes face the greatest 
challenge from synthetic dyes, which will question the usefulness and the 
successfulness of natural dyes in the sector of textile and textile products. Other 
aspects in question are the availability and continuity of standard raw materials 
in the upstream, transitional, and downstream industrial sectors, distribution 
sector, and market segmentation which will affect other sectors, including the 
social sector.  
The existence of synthetic fibers and their variations which dominate the market 
limits the involvement of natural dyes (since the effective application of natural 
dyes is on natural fibers, which have the most optimal affinity toward natural 
dyes). As long as there is no new breakthrough in the production technology, it 
will be difficult for natural dyes to regain its role in the past, as the only source 
of coloring matters. On the opposite, the development of research, technology, 
and engineering will soon anticipate the shortcomings of synthetic dyes and 
produce new synthetic dyes twice as advantageous.  
What if the prohibition does not exist or no harmful substance is found inside 
synthetic dyes? Will there be any attention to revive the potential of natural 
dyes? Will there be an opportunity to look forward to reviving natural dyes, 
besides the external factors, namely the prohibition, eco-labeling, and others. 
Will there be a chance to revive natural dyes based on their internal potentials, 
without having to be controlled by external factors? If there are potentials, 
where do they lie and how is the best strategy to develop the potentials? 
As long as there is no breakthrough in the research and engineering of natural 
dyes which will make it as useful and successful as synthetic dyes, it is difficult 
for natural dyes to have an opportunity to play a leading role in the fiber and 
fashion business controlled by the market, in both small and large scales, since 
the success is measured through the rules of the manufacturing industry of mass 
culture styles. The rules require submission to uniformity of quality, reduction 
of price according to the high quantity of minimum order, and are affected by 
the laws of mass production technology and engineering oriented toward the 
?market-driven? view. This kind of industry is not at all wrong. It even needs 
more support since it is necessary and, controversy aside, is one of the 
important factors in the development of national economy.  
126 Dian Widiawati 
Although so, the kind of industry mentioned is not the only approach. The 
production process does not always have to be uniform, carefully measured, and 
predictable. Consumers do not always need the same and uniform products. In 
the fashion business, there is a great desire to be unique, to be different from 
others. This can be seen as an opportunity.  
Being anticipative and proactive in providing an alternative solution of reviving 
natural dyes is therefore more important than trying to confront synthetic dyes, 
which is yet to produce something significant. Natural dyes and synthetic dyes 
need not be confronted to each other since each has its own mission and 
importance. Natural dyes are supposedly positioned within the great cultural 
heritage, where they can exist, succeed, and be promoted according to the 
values that they contain, as well as be acknowledged as an indigenous 
technology. The socio-cultural aspect of the existence of natural dyes in the 
long history of traditions in the archipelago holds numerous secrets of 
expressions of civilization and human thoughts. Nevertheless, the aspect never 
seems to gain much attention and natural dyes are seen as mere illustrations. 
The discussion of the aspect is yet to appear in various activities involving the 
technology of coloring matters, even though this aspect holds the greatest 
potential of natural dyes.  
However, the potential can only be visible when we not only use the point of 
view of economic-engineering, but also use the point of view of arts and culture 
to perceive the ?economic? potential of a commodity and to offer the potential to 
the new markets created through cultural development in the society, where the 
?secret? probably lies.  
A certain strategy is required to promote natural dyes as products worth 
appreciating and worth having, not because of their technological advancement, 
but because of their social, historical, and cultural backgrounds. Vast 
knowledge in the field is also required besides technical skills.  
For example, in the past, colors and the nature that produces them are not only 
raw materials but they also have symbolic meanings and represent supernatural 
powers which are to the survival of their producing communities. The 
appearance of colors in various products, especially fabrics, becomes an 
important part of traditional rituals. Another distinctive quality of natural dyes 
is their ?weakness,? their unpredictability and their lack of standardized quality 
of color expression. The qualities of water, mineral contents, and climate have 
been known as the factors that cause the differences in similar colors produced 
in several regions. Amidst the mass culture that exalts uniformity, the 
?weakness? of natural dyes might as well become their selling point. There are 
varying types of uniqueness, both related directly and indirectly to natural dyes, 
 Natural Fibers and Natural Dyes in Indonesian Textile 127 
 
which can be explored further to support the promotion of natural dyes. The 
uniqueness may cover the origin of a particular dye, from the cultivation of the 
dye-producing plant to the manual blending of ingredients which causes also a 
distinct aroma, the usage of the dye in rituals, ornaments, traditional fashion, 
folk tales, and many other purposes. Thus, it is important to realize that the 
knowledge of the uniqueness is significant and is the selling point of natural 
dyes, which may not be found in any other places. 
The relevance of availability of raw materials and processing skills to the 
determination of product types and variations also deserves a special attention. 
The ability of nature to provide natural dyes is not as sustainable as it used to be 
and is different from one region to another. This will affect the availability of 
products using natural dyes, both quantitatively and qualitatively. A new 
strategy is then required in the sector of production among natural dyes 
production centers. In this case, the role of a supporting element of natural dyes 
becomes important: natural fibers (which may not be as extensive as natural 
dyes, but are also facing the same existential problems). The diversity of 
tropical plants in Indonesia is a force to be reckoned with. It is able to complete 
and widen the range of variation of product using natural dyes. Similar to 
natural dyes, natural fibers physically have the same origins and interesting 
historical and cultural backgrounds. Natural fibers are the most important 
partner of natural dyes, ever since their first inception. It is not exaggerating to 
say that natural fibers empower natural dyes. The recent development of natural 
fibers focuses on the experiments using various alternative natural fibers, such 
as abaca (musa textilis), agel (corypha gebanga), klowong cotton, eceng 
gondok/ water hyacinth (Eichornia crassipes), banana, and corn husk. There are 
also other materials that support natural dyes, such as animal skin, various types 
of wood and bark, bamboo, and rattan.  
It is important to know the segmentation or the group of the market/society that 
demands natural dye products. This segment appears due to the recent 
development of technology and arts, which results in individual appeal, opinion, 
and perception. Pluralism in the postmodern society is becoming reality. If the 
society in the twentieth century craves for products of mass fabrication which 
(by force) cause the necessity for synthetic substances, then today and in the 
future, people look for limited products with wide ranges of diversification, 
which bring about the search for and re-appreciation of cultural roots and 
attention toward natural and environmental reservation. The emergence of the 
terms ?ethnic design? ,?back to nature?, ?recycled products?, ?environment-
friendly?, and ?biodegradable?  shows the tendency to support the reservation 
which, in turn, points to the potential of natural dyes and the opportunity to 
develop them to answer the challenge according to the natural dyes? inherent 
128 Dian Widiawati 
values. One of potential segments for natural dyes is of course the tourism 
market, projected to become the reliable industry of the future. 
9 Preliminary Conclusion 
It is clear that the revival of natural dyes in the context of cultural approach is 
not a sectoral job or a job relying only on one type of skill. Besides the 
carefulness in promoting and publicizing, marketing and management, the 
producers must also have skills in plant cultivation, inventorying of craft centers 
and proficient craftsmen who are ready to inherit their skills to new craftsmen. 
The involvement of expertise in craft product design where natural dyes are a 
part of is also essential in positioning and marketing strategies. In brief, 
although the revival of natural dyes relies on cultural approaches, a 
professionally coordinated network among arts, socio-cultural elements, 
engineering, and economy is necessary. If this is achieved, the revival of natural 
dyes will have its full opportunity.  
Acknowledgement 
Gratefully acknowledge Dr. Biranul Anas Zaman, Faculty of Fine Art And 
Design, ITB, Drs. Hendri Suprapto, for providing the data and Information. 
References 
[1] Dean, Jenny. 1999. Wild Colour, Octopus Publishing Group Ltd. 
London.United Kingdom. 
[2] Anas, Biranul, et al. 1995. Batik, Indonesia Indah, 8, Yayasan Harapan 
Kita/BP3 TMII, Jakarta, Indonesia. 
[3] Maxwel, Robyn. 2003. Sari To Sarong, Five Hundred Years Of Indian 
Art Indonesia Textile Exchange, Nation Gallery of Australia. 
[4] Anas, Biranul, et al. 1995. Tenunan Indonesia, Indonesia Indah, 3, 
Yayasan Harapan Kita/BP3 TMII, Jakarta , Indonesia. 
[5] Djoemena, Nian S. 2000. Lurik, Garis-Garis Bertuah, The Magic Stripes, 
Djambatan,Jakarta, Indonesia. 
[6] Suprapto, Hendri. 2000. Penggunaan Zat Pewarna Alami untuk Batik, 
Balai Besar Penelitian dan Pengembangan Industri Kerajinan dan Batik, 
Yogyakarta, Indonesia. 
 
