  
ITB J. Vis. Art & Des., Vol. 3, No. 2, 2009, 175-186                      175 
 
Enhancing Local Designers Skill in Rattan Furniture 
Industries in Cirebon through Comprehensive-Design 
Approach Regarding BuyersÅf Dependencies Prevention 
 Andar Bagus Sriwarno & Imam Damar Djati  
Research Group of Human and Industrial Product, Industrial Design Section,  
Bandung Institute of Technology  
 
 
Abstract. Between the 1970s and the 1990s, the Indonesian economy has been 
transforming from an agriculture-based to an industry-based economy. 
According to this condition, Cirebon growth rapidly to export rattan goods even 
this city has no resources in rattan. The lack of design quality, export regulation 
and global economic crisis become the main factor to affect the decrease of 
companyÅfs income at recent. Despite the crisis, government is now trying to 
recover by inviting design expert to improve design skills and capacity building 
of entrepreneurs in particular small-medium scale enterprises. This study aims to 
define why Cirebon still lags behind in industrial competitiveness regarding 
rattan furniture design. The intervention program of design is conducted to seek 
out the craftsmanÅfs ability and determined the kind of design competitiveness 
advantages according their nature of business. 
Keywords: capacity building; competitiveness; design intervention. 
1 Introduction 
Rattan certainly is an exotic material for those living in non-tropical countries as 
it mostly grows in tropical regions, particularly Southeast Asia. Rattan furniture 
(Figure 1) is one of the province's top creative businesses that cause Cirebon as 
home of 80 percent of the country's total rattan enterprises. Indonesia is one of 
the biggest rattan producers in the world with a production capacity of 250,000 
to 400,000 tons per year. Rattan industries in Cirebon are growth naturally 
without a proper master plan supported by a local government [1]. The lack of 
future orientation affects to the position that low in bargain position. This 
results in the low ability of a strong business management that can strengthen 
the position of the buyer. The appearance of business mechanism actually 
comes from the desire of the business stake holders on how to earn profit from 
the production quantity based on the specification of the buyer and ignores to 
improve the quality of production through new designs [2]. This cradled 
condition results the continuous order conditions for several years and the 
company gradually lost the ability in the development of design due to routine 
business that occurred repeatedly [3]. The change in national economic and 
political situation recently turn the business began to shock, where many 
176 Andar Bagus Sriwarno & Imam Damar Djati 
employers are experiencing a business slowdown or even a bankruptcy. This 
shifted condition run increasingly and put the company into the second chain of 
business which results in the loss of competitiveness due to very low market 
bargaining [4]. 
It has been reported that this city is suffering a decline in rattan exports year by 
year significantly [2,5]. As reported by Santosa [4], the decline has been 
identified to issues that Ministry of Trade had introduced a regulation banning 
the export of the commodity in 2005. This current condition impacts to the lack 
of guarantee that Cirebon will have enough feedstock of raw rattan when quotas 
are imposed. In the other hands, where the access to information about design 
rights is not readily available to use, it is not possible to research beforehand 
whether the products ordered by the buyers infringe on existing design rights. 
Indonesia currently has design-protection laws on the books, but in places like 
Cirebon where businesses engaged in the same industry are concentrated in one 
locale, imitation goods often hit the market before there has been time for the 
original design to be registered. This is an indication of just how weak 
producers are when they are at the beck and call of buyers. It has to be 
emphasized that developing a legal environment that includes laws to prevent 
unfair competition and capacity building to rise design skills are vital to the 
intervention of design program. According to the above problems, in this study, 
rat-tan furniture enterprises in Cirebon were chosen as the destination for the 
development of creative industries study. In this research, a comprehensive 
skills improvement method is applied the to small-medium scale entrepreneurs 
prior to post government regulation effect. 
 
Figure 1 Typical design of rattan furniture in Cirebon. 
2  Methodology 
The numbers of participants were 40 local designers that selected from about 60 
candidates. They were recruited under the requirement of certain ability of 
design including sketching, making technical drawing, and understanding to 
 Enhancing local designers skill in rattan furniture industries 177 
 
production line, and market analysis. The term of activity is named intervention 
design program and held periodically during August 2008 until June 2009 
which comprises in two phases of activity. First activity is screening phase 
which to select participants as eligible person who will be observed and allow 
them to report the feed back of working activity in the factory. Second activity 
is an action program which is conducted based on the baseline data from 
screening phase. The venue of the program was in the Technical Support Center 
owned by Ministry of Trade and Industry in Cirebon. 
3 Results 
3.1 Screening Phase (ParticipantÅfs Subjective Data) 
Participants are requested to fill the form of questionnaire that investigating 
their company condition. The purpose of screening step is to asses the current 
situation concerning related design development that may lead to define existing 
problems. Figure 2 showed that companies have experience in design 
development since (d) a year ago (42%), (c) five and (d) ten year ago (24%), 
and (a) ten years ago (10%). According to this data, most of companies have 
started to improve the design by themselves about a year ago (around 2007-
2008). As predicted, method of design development regarding buyers 
specification are (b) modification from exist-ing products (65%), (c) new 
product development (19%), and (a) imitating successful design in the market 
(8%).  
The lack of design skills affect to the ability of modifying buyerÅfs specification 
(Figure 3). In order to determine design specification, the owner of company 
has an almost dominant role (47%) to decide an appropriate design for buyers 
(a),  remains showed that marketing section (d) has 23% of decision maker 
whilst designer (c) contributes to propose design only in 17% to buyers (Figure 
4). It is common to find that in-house designer often works not only for de-sign 
but also responsible to control the product quality (b) about 61%, or material 
purchasing (a) about 24%, or communicating with buyers (a) about 24%, and 
marketing to delivery (d) about 5% (Figure 5).  
It was assumed that participants were not graduated from the school of design 
or related formal education. As shown in Figure 6, most of participants were not 
graduated from formal design school but they learned about design from various 
sources. They are able to draw and built the sense of art by them self (a) to 
improve their design skills about 67%, 21% of them were assisted by 
companyÅfs owner to under-stand the customerÅfs life style, and only 9% is re-
ported to attend the informal design training. Due to the lack of design skills, in 
order to meet the buyerÅfs demand which come with none of design 
specification, 56% of participant response to create the design by modifying the 
178 Andar Bagus Sriwarno & Imam Damar Djati 
existing design(c). 23% was re-ported to create a new design (b) even though 
the design often to be rejected by buyer. 19% was shown to copy or duplicate an 
existing design (a) and the remains data was informed that participants were not 
able to create buyerÅfs specification (d) about 2% (Figure 7).  
It is common in Cirebon when company is found to invent a new design, other 
companies are motivated to conduct the similar way of development (a/82%) as 
shown in Figure 8. 9% is shown that local designers try to find any information 
about the method of design development (b) whilst 3% is re-ported to wait the 
market responses of the new product before copying (d). The lack of design 
skills regarding substitute material was confirm to the fol-owing data in Figure 
9 which 64% of participants were not familiar to the methods of design 
development due to material combination approach (a) while 30% was reported 
to have enough capability with the method of material substitute such as abaca, 
banana fiber, and eceng gondok (water hyacinth species) (30%). Only 6% of 
companies reported to experience in combining natural material in the rattan 
furniture design (c). In the development of design skills (Figure 10), participants 
realize that the ability of decoding market trend is needed (c/49%) whilst the 
lack of sketching also had to be taken into account (a/36%). Prior to pass the 
quality control, the ability to produce understandable drawing is also need to 
improve (b/18%). 
 
Figure 2 The period of design development experience in the company. 
 
Figure 3 Method of design development. 
 Enhancing local designers skill in rattan furniture industries 179 
 
 
Figure 4 Determination of design judgment in the company. 
 
Figure 5 Overlapped-job handled by in-house designer. 
 
Figure 6 Self improvement about design skills. 
 
Figure 7 The way to determine buyerÅfs design specification. 
180 Andar Bagus Sriwarno & Imam Damar Djati 
 
Figure 8 Method to launch a ÅgnewÅh design. 
 
Figure 9 The distribution of knowledge proportion regarding substitute 
material. 
 
Figure 10 The need of specific ability of design. 
 
Figure 11 Expectation after participating intervention program. 
 Enhancing local designers skill in rattan furniture industries 181 
 
Interestingly, as shown in Figure 11, participants are motivated to develop their 
own design skills by building new enterprise instead as companyÅfs in-house 
designer (a/45%) after attending intervention program.  32% participants donÅft 
really care about whom they are belonging to but they pay attention to have a 
good sense to read the market trend and decode it into design (c/32%). 
Rests of participants are still consistent to stay in the companies by sharing their 
knowledge from the program (b/21%). 
3.2 Action Phase 
3.2.1 Introduction of Design (Basic Knowledge/Refreshment) and 
Memory Recalling 
 
Figure 12 Reverse drawing and memory recalling. 
 
Figure 13 Design critics and feedback. 
The material of action phase is including basic design, standardization-
regulation, and design management. In this activity, participants are asked to 
182 Andar Bagus Sriwarno & Imam Damar Djati 
define and map their related problems regarding design development. In 
accordance of drawing ability screening, participants are asked to draw the 
chosen furniture as like as possible. The next step was to re-drawing previous 
design without existing model in front of them (Figure 12). 
3.2.2 Consumer Behavior Study, Describing ConsumerÅfs Trend 
and Decoding Trend into Design 
 
Figure 14 Sketching and generating idea of design. 
 
Figure 15 Updated technical drawing. 
 Enhancing local designers skill in rattan furniture industries 183 
 
According to the data in first phase, the lack of creativity in decoding the 
marketÅfs need is one of the problems to realize design sketch. In this activity, 
participants are motivated through visual stimulation which allows participants 
to break down the point of trend code. These codes (determined in adjective 
group of words) have to be transformed into the sketches (Figure 14) and 
technical drawing (Figure 15). Due to customers look for furniture that suits to 
their life style, sketches should like fashion that constantly easy to changes. It 
can be said that meeting consumers' tastes is vital in staying ahead of the market 
competition. 
3.2.3 Design Novelty (Intellectual Property Right/IPR Approach) 
Under the intellectual property rights system, design development based on IPR 
was introduced therefore participants understand about the importance of design 
registration. Applicants who are in the process of registering receive what is 
known as preliminary protection so that they can continue to run their 
businesses without having to wait for the issuance of their certificates. This was 
contrary to what was believed by many entrepreneurs that design can not be 
launched during evaluation process done by government which need over than 6 
month [1]. The novelty of design which introduced in this activity was judged 
according to three method of judgments: searching an existing design from 
catalog, searching from www (online catalog and IPR database), and judgment 
from design expert (Head of Indonesian Furniture and Craft Association) as 
shown in Figure 13. 
3.2.4 Substitute Material Approach and Design Refinement 
The image of eceng gondok handicrafts and furniture is also on the rise on the 
overseas markets thanks to the massive back-to-nature campaign worldwide. 
Unlike rattan or wood or other natural materials, eceng gondok was introduced 
as a slightly thicker and much easier material to shape in forming and designing 
an item. The furniture also gives a more natural impression. 
3.2.5 Prototyping and Design Promotion for Exhibition 
The goal of all activities in design intervention is making prototypes (Figure 16) 
and preparing material for exhibition such as catalog (Figure 17). 
184 Andar Bagus Sriwarno & Imam Damar Djati 
 
Figure 16 Prototyping. 
 
Figure 17 Design catalog for exhibition. 
4 Discussion and Conclusions 
The government regulation of raw materials export No. 12 in 2005 is just only a 
trigger to open the real problems in rattan business. The dependencies to 
buyerÅfs specification let larger companies run their business into tailor made 
relationship and split the component to sub-producers. The lack of design 
 Enhancing local designers skill in rattan furniture industries 185 
 
awareness leads companies to imitate or copy the existing design which shows 
high demand in the market. Regarding design infringement, government doesnÅft 
seriously strictly enforce intellectual property rights, help the industry to 
diversify away from conventional raw materials and improve the laws, 
particularly on import and export procedures. The poor enforcement of 
intellectual property rights, particularly the protection of industrial designs, had 
reduced the capacity of the local furniture industry to create new designs [6]. 
Increasingly tough competition in overseas markets seems to be responsible for 
the problems affecting the local rattan furniture industry.  
The only way to get out from this horrible situation is for Cirebon producers to 
create their own de-signs and sell them on the international market. Through 
this design intervention program, local de-signers should develop their own 
potency in the future regarding new style of rattan furniture. One of the methods 
is increasing the value of rattan goods as an exclusive product. This program is 
just the trigger to open the latency ability of in-house de-signers. To promote 
the development of original designs, the current situation in which original 
designs are illegally appropriated must be changed. However, by the fact of 
recent data, we still expressed optimism that Cirebon could still find certain 
market niches with new design by applying new method and good design 
principles in the international rattan furniture market.  
Producers should learn how to utilize other substitute non-rattan materials that 
are currently not used in furniture production. During observation, many natural 
items have been identified which suitable to produce as a rope for wickers. One 
of the potentials one is dried eceng gondok, a plant on which now relies on to 
survive. This is one of the ways to escape from the dependencies of rattan local 
stock that showed decrease in supply. The rest are simply not used and seems 
promising due to the less of competitor and raw material price. 
According to the program of intervention, we come to the conclusion which 
pointed as follows: 
1. Rattan furniture has enormous export potential due to the volume of natural 
resources. Sustained supply of quality rattan is important. Regulation of 
export ban is needed to re-evaluate. 
2. Maintaining close links to, and regular feedback from, the market is 
important for ensuring the sustainability of the unit in small-medium scale 
enterprises. 
3. Producing rattan furniture is skills dependent. However it offers workers 
considerable opportunities for skills enhancement. A program of design 
skills development coupled with staff promotion will maintain the vitality 
of the unit and impact to the confidence level of local designer. This also 
confirms the approach of rural development con-ducted by [7].  
186 Andar Bagus Sriwarno & Imam Damar Djati 
4. Establishing a design department within the unit would be beneficial. 
Developing new designs can help maintain and develop market presence. 
Sustainability of intervention program is needed.  
5. Cirebon rattan industry needs to rework its relationship with its buyers so 
that it does not merely manufacture the designs they dictate, but instead 
presents its own designs and the buyers choose which ones they want. 
Under this new relation-ship, the Cirebon rattan industry could escape from 
its current subcontractor status and surely achieve great growth and 
development. 
Acknowledgement 
This study is supported by ITB Research Grant. We gratefully acknowledge 
Drs. A. Gustiar, Head of Regional Office, Department of Industry and Trade, 
Bandung, for his technical assistance. 
References 
[1] Sriwarno, A.B. 2001. Strategi pengembangan desain mebel melalui 
pendekatan Hak atas Kekayaan Intelektual (Studi Kasus : Industri Mebel 
dan Kerajinan Rotan Tegalwangi, Cirebon. Institute of Technology 
Bandung. 
[2] Yamamoto, Y. 2005. JPO Cooperation in Human Resource Development 
-Towards Promoting Design - Report from Cirebon, Indonesia. Technical 
Report in Intellectual Prop-erty of PT. Hakindah International, Indonesia. 
[3] Sriwarno, A.B. 2004. Konteks Usaha Pengembangan Desain Mebel 
Rotan di Lingkungan Industri Rotan Cirebon dan Penerapan Sistem HKI 
(Hak Kekayaan Intelektual). Jurnal Desain 2d3D, 1(2), pp. 99-124. 
[4] Santoso S.E. 2007. The socio-economic impact of rattan in-dustry cluster 
in Plumbon and Weru region, Cirebon regency, West Java, Indonesia. 
Thesis, Program Studi Mag-ister Perencanaan Kota dan Daerah, Jurusan 
Ilmu-Ilmu Teknik.  
[5] Aulia, H. 2005. Tinjauan biaya pemasaran terhadap produk jadi 
kerajinan rotan pada CV Limindo Utama di Cirebon. Technical Report. 
Fakultas Bisnis dan Manajemen Jurusan Manajemen Diploma III, 
Widyatama University, Bandung. 
[6] Pekerti, S. 2002. Product brief furniture industry. Foreign Ag-ricultural 
Service, GAIN Report, Global Agriculture In-formation Network 
Indonesia. 
[7] Maxwell, J. 2002. Sulaksono, B., Budiyati S., Hastuti, Akhmadi, 
Munawar W., Rahayu, S.K.. Village Non-Farm Eco-nomic Activity: An 
Account from A Village in Kabupaten Cirebon. Technical Report of 
SEMERU Research Group. 
 
